A. POETICS
INTRODUCTION

Aristotle's Poetics is probably the most important single book that has ever
been written about poetry, both for what it says and for what it has been taken
to say. Various factors make it a work singularly easy to misinterpret, and the
misinterpretations have been just as seminal in the development of aesthetic
theory and, at some periods, of poetry itself as a correct understanding of it.
The factors that make for misunderstanding are worth listing, if only for
monitory purposes: (I) Aristotle's thought, though generally exquisitely lucid,
is never easy and never slack; it is therefore as hard for a person who knows
Greek to follow him as it is for a person who knows English to follow Hume.
(2) Some accidental features of its composition or its transmission have made
the Poetics one of his most compressed and elliptical works; the contrast with
the comparatively open texture of the Rhetoric, for instance, is marked. (3)
Aristotle presupposed in his audience an acquaintance not only with the doctrines
of the Ethics and Politics but also with the central concepts of his logical and metaphysical theories (cf. below, pp. 98 n. 4, 99n. I, 101 n. 3,106 n. I). (4) The Poetics
envisages a variety of different interests in literature, the politician'S, the poet's,
the critic's; but the book is not written primarily for any of these, but rather
for the philosopher. In other words, it is neither principally a defence of poetry,

86

ARISTOTLE

nor a treatise on how to write it, nor an enunciation of principles of literary
criticism, though it has elements of all these; it is first and foremost a work of
aesthetic theory, and interpretations that under-stress this fact inevitably lead to
distortion.
ARISTOTLE'S THEORY OF AESTHETIC PLEASURE

Aristotle had a quite coherent theory of the nature of our pleasure in art. It
starts from simple principles and ramifies everywhere; it explains his preferences
in literature and it is the antithesis of Plato's, though it accepts some of the same
presuppositions.
The basic premiss of Aristotle's aesthetic theory is stated in c. 4 of the
Poetics and several times in the Rhetoric (below, pp. 94, 134, ISO): it is that by
and large human beings positively enjoy learning or understanding or realizing
things. ' Our desire to understand things is a natural desire like hunger, and its
satisfaction is pleasurable, a 'restoration to a natural state', like eating (below,
p. 134). Our pleasure in art is a branch of this pleasure; the poet or the orator
or the painter makes us see or understand things that we did not see before, and
particularly he points out the relations and similarities between different things,
enables us to say, in Aristotle's phrase, 'this is that' (below, pp. 94, 134, ISO).
This basic foundation of aesthetic pleasure explains many of Aristotle's
further requirements in art. First and foremost, it justifies the general Greek
belief, which Aristotle accepted and elaborately defends, that art is essentially
'representational', i.e. that mimesis is necessary to it.' Aristotle takes the relation
between mimesis and mathesis to be a close one, both at the simplest level, where
'we make our first steps in learning through mimesis' (below, p. 94) and at the
infinitely more sophisticated one where the tragic poet makes 'general statements'
analogous to those of the moral philosopher. At the lowest level mimesis is what
Plato asserted it was at any level, mere copying, a parrot act that can be performed
without any real knowledge of the act or object copied; even here, however,
Aristotle implies that though we may not have knowledge before we engage in
mimesis we acquire knowledge by engaging in it. And at the higher level the
tragic poet, presenting individually characterized people in specific situations,
makes us aware of moral facts and moral possibilities relevant to more than the
situation he envisages.
If mimesis is to produce the sort of realization that Aristotle demands of art
at its best, a prime requirement is obviously truth. A poem or play that operates
in the realm of fantasy can charm and rouse wonder, and Aristotle is as susceptible as anyone to the enchantment of the fantastic in Homer (below,
pp. 125 f.). Yet his judgement is against fantasy and given in favour of the more
I These are different possible translations of mathesis and the associated verb manthanein.
Z Once at any rate, in an interesting passage of the Phi/eh us (SI b--e), Plato does
question the necessity of mimesis to aesthetic pleasure; but in general he, like Aristotle,
accepts the general Greek assumption that our pleasure in art is principally pleasure in
mimesis.

POETICS

rigorous causal chain of tragedy,' which, because it is presented to the senses
and not just to the feebler imagination, cannot afford to follow epic into the
area of the marvellous and the irrational.
Yet the realization must be a sudden one too, and for this the prime requirement is surprise. A play whose plot, however truthful, is predictable will not
give us the pleasure of sudden realization. This is the reason for Aristotle's
insistence on the unexpected and a second reason for his preference for the
complex form of tragedy, which is defined with reference to surprise turns
(peripeteiai) and recognitions. It is juxtaposition that best makes us aware of
opposites (below, pp. 138, 149, 167), and the sudden reversals of fortune in complex tragedy most powerfully bring home to us the truths that the poet is stating.
For both these reasons Aristotle regards complex tragedy as the entelecheia
or full realization of the essential nature of poetry. It is the form that makes us
realize most truth fastest, and therefore provides in greatest measure and concentration the pleasure that a work of art can provide. The same criteria are deployed not only to judge between or within literary kinds, but also in evaluating
details of style, both in poetry and prose. It is the requirements of mathisis
that determine the high estimate Aristotle sets on metaphor (pp. 122,150), on
the periodic style (p. 148), on antithetical expression (pp. 149, 150 f., 154), on
rhythm in prose (p. 146), on various forms of argument (p. 150).
THE DEFENCE OF TRAGEDY

Whatever may be true of other arts, 2 tragedy at any rate operates on a consciousness heightened by intense emotion, and specifically by the two emotions of
fear and pity. The discussion of these two emotions in Rhetoric 2. 5 and 2. 9
shows them closely related; essentially they are roused by the same kind of
situations, but fear is self-regarding and pity other-regarding. Aristotle's statement that tragedy arouses fear in the audience therefore implies that he takes
for granted a remarkable degree of identification between the audience and the
characters presented. No doubt the fear felt by the audience of tragedy does not
cover the whole range of fear in ordinary life, but the flat statement of the
Rhetoric 3 inescapably implies that Aristotle does not agree with Dr. Johnson's
'The truth is, the audience are always in their senses', much less with more
recent aesthetic theories about the necessity of 'distancing'.
A by-product of the stimulation of these intense emotions is their catharsis
(p. 97). This cryptic phrase has attracted more attention than it deserves,
but the theory concealed by it is nevertheless important. Plato had attacked
mimesis, and particularly tragedy, on two counts, the first that it does not present
us with truth (above, pp. 66 ff.), the second that it stimulates emotions that a
, The topic is developed in Poetics, cc. 7-9, below, pp. 100 If.
2 It is never made quite clear whether or not epic also operates by rousing the same
emotions as tragedy.
3 1382b30 If. 'No one feels fear if he thinks nothing is likely to happen to him, or
fear of things he does not think would happen to him or of people he does not think
likely to harm him, or at the time when he does not anticipate harm.'

88

ARISTOTLE

good man tries to suppress (above, pp. 69 ff.). Aristotle's answer to the first
charge is to be found in the mathesis doctrine, and especially in c. 9 of the
Poetics: Plato had claimed that an instance of mimesis has less reality than an
individual particular, which in turn has less reality than the idea. Aristotle
replies that the statements of the poet, so far from being inferior to statements of
particulars, are more comprehensive and more philosophical (below, p. 102);
ifhe were thinking in Platonic terms this would amount to saying that the object
of mimesis is not the particular but the idea. Of course he does not say any such
thing, as he did not believe in substantive ideai; but the implication was drawn
by later Platonists. 1 The answer to Plato's second charge is contained in the
reference to catharsis. 2
Some light is thrown on the concept of catharsis by the passage cited from the
Politics (below, pp. 132 ff.). But that passage is also in some respects misleading, as there Aristotle is talking from the point of view of the legislator and
educationalist and discussing the uses of various kinds of music. In the Poetics
he is indeed talking at the legislator, but not from his point of view, and he can
be content with a more purely defensive position. As against Plato he only has
to show that tragedy's stimulation of the emotions is not in fact undesirable and
may indeed be beneficial.
The passage, unprovided with the explanation promised in the Politics, has
provoked the most various interpretations. The most promising line is that
put forward by House, op. cit., pp. 100 ff.; he takes catharsis in its medical sense
of the production of a 'mean', and interprets the concept of 'mean' in Aristotle's
own sense. When we consider what degree of emotion is 'undue', we take into
account not merely the quantity of emotion but its object and its circumstances
(Nic. Eth. II06b l8 ff. 'One can feel fear, confidence, desire, anger, pity .•.
both too much and too little, and in both cases wrongly; but the mean is attained
when we feel them at the right time, at the right objects, towards the right
people, for the right reason, in the right way'). Aristotle's answer to Plato,
so maddeningly undeveloped, seems to be that tragedy presents us with objects
(great and good men suffering terrible fortunes) that are proportioned to the
degree of emotion they arouse. So far from encouraging a vicious indulgence
in emotion on any and every occasion, tragedy gives us an imaginative apprehension of a degree of suffering normally beyond our ken. We need not suppose that
Aristotle has romantic expectations about the educative power of tragedy; of
course one perception of the mean is not enough to make a virtuous man. Yet
any perception of the mean helps one to right feeling and right behaviour, and
that is so far, so good.
It is important that the concept of catharsis does not commit Aristotle to
either of two erroneous aesthetic positions common both in antiquity and later
times. Catharsis is not something the tragic poet aims to produce. His aim is
Cicero, Orator 8 If., Plotinus S. 8. I.
It certainly required a reply and in the Poetics gets no other. This is a main
reason for rejecting the interpretation of catharsis recently proposed by L. Golden,
Transactions of the American Philological Association, 93, 1962, SS If. (reiterated in the
commentary of Golden and Hardison); cf. also Classical Philology 64,1969, 145 If.
I

2

POETICS
defined below (p. 108) as 'to produce the pleasure springing from pity and fear
via mimesis'. Catharsis is a therapeutic by-product, not something the poet either
does or should intend. But just as Aristotle can therefore avoid the Scylla of
taking the poet to have a duty to improve his audience's morals, he equally
shuns the Charybdis of denying that poetry has any moral effect. Tragedy is
not trivial; it does alter our moral attitudes, and a legislator might well consider
whether to do something about it. Aristotle is not however convinced that the
legislator would be well advised to tell the poet what kind of poems to write.
THE TRANSLATION

Theories on how to translate the Poetics are almost as numerous as the actual
translations. This translation is based on the single principle of trying to make
coherent sense, of the material presented by tradition when one can make sense
of it, of modem conjectures when one cannot. The attempt to express in English
the logical relation between Aristotle's ideas inevitably leads to some camouflaging
of the way he puts them, but is necessary to avoid the more damaging impression
that Aristotle spoke a version of the higher Babu. If he arranges two nouns
and two adjectives chiastically and says that the ridiculous is 'a blunder or
ugliness that does not imply pain or cause damage', one should suppress this
stylistic elegance in the interests of clarity. Ifhe says 'On the one hand this and
on the other hand that' and means, as Greeks did, 'Though this, nevertheless
that' or alternatively 'Just as this, so also that', it is better to make him say in
English what he means in Greek. If he wants to say 'anything' and has to use a
word equally open to the translation 'everything', there is no reason to make
him tell lies by putting the second into his mouth. He is not responsible for the
fact that Greek is over-fond of the co-ordinate form of expression and sometimes
uses one word for two different concepts. Anyone who understood his author
would accept such principles of translation if he were dealing with, say, an
orator; there is no sense in allowing a slavish adherence to the actual Greek
words to obscure Aristotle's meaning in a way that would not be tolerable in a
rendering ofDemosthenes. On the other hand, I have tried to be very scrupulous
in warning the reader by square brackets whenever I have added a phrase to
show what I take to be the logical relation between sentences. The chapter and
paragraph headings are mine.
Some constant technical terms are merely transliterated, like peripeteia or
pathos (with its plural patM); these are defined in the treatise itself and when
used in the sense defined are left in their transliterated form. I have followed
the same course with mimesis, the central concept of the Poetics, which is too
important to be rendered by an only roughly approximate English word. It is
never defined and the range of ideas Aristotle uses it to cover is a shifting one;
one sees better what they are if one comes to it with no English-based preconceptions.
In some other places, particularly those dealing with minute stylistic points,
the Greek examples are left untranslated; we have no way, for instance, of
showing in English the stylistic effect of what Aristotle calls a 'dialect term'

90

ARISTOTLE

(below p. 119). Merely to render it by a stronger, though current, English word
undervalues the strangeness of the dialect term, while a scattering of occasional
phrases from Lallans or Mummerset would not be, to English taste, agreeable.
CHAPTER

I

THE PRELIMINARIES TO THE DEFINITION OF TRAGEDY

Contents
1447' The subject I wish us to discuss is poetry itself, its species with their
1

respective capabilities, the correct way of constructing plots so that the
work turns out well, the number and nature of the constituent elements
[of each species], and anything else in the same field of inquiry.
SECTION A. THE DIVISION PER GENUS ET DIFFERENTIAM
I.

The genus we are here concerned with stated!

To follow the natural order and take first things first, epic and tragic
poetry, comedy and dithyrambic, and most music for the flute or lyre
are all, generally considered, varieties of mimesis, differing from each other
in three respects, the media, the objects, and the mode of mimesis.
['Media' needs explaining]: in some cases where people, whether by
technical rules or practised facility, produce various mimeseis by portraying
things, the media are colours and shapes, while in others the medium
is the voice;2 similarly in the arts in question, taken collectively, the media
of mimesis are rhythm, speech, and harmony, either separately or in
combination.
2.

(a)

The genus divided

ACCORDING TO DIFFERENCES OF MEDIA

(i) Those which do not use speech

For example, harmony and rhythm are the media of instrumental
music,3 rhythm alone without harmony the medium of dancing, as dancers
I The genus that Aristotle proceeds to divide is not, as one sometimes finds stated,
mimesis in general, but a variety of mimesis defined by the media, 'mimesis in speech,
harmony, and rhythm, separately or in combination'.
2 The reference is to sounds, not necessarily articulate, made by the human vocal
organs. Direct mimicry of the bird-call kind seems to be what Aristotle has in mind.
3 Literally 'flute-playing and lyre-playing and any other arts that have the same
capability, for example, playing the Pan-pipe'.

POETICS

91

represent characters, passions, I and actions by rhythmic movement and
postures.
(ii) Those which do use speech (i.e. the poetic kinds)2
The art that uses only speech by itself or verse [that is, rhythmical
speech], the verses being homogeneous or of different kinds, has as yet 1447b
no name;3 for we have no common term to apply to the [prose] mimes of
Sophron and Xenarchus and to the Socratic dialogues, nor any common
term for mimeseis produced in verse, whether iambic trimeters or elegiacs
or some other such metre. True, people do attach the making [that is the
root of the word poietes] to the name of a metre and speak of elegiacmakers and hexameter-makers; they think, no doubt, that 'makers' is
applied to poets not because they make mimeseis but as a general term
meaning 'verse-makers', since they call 'poets' or 'makers' even those
who publish a medical or scientific theory in verse. But [this is open to
two objections]: (I) as Homer and Empedocles have nothing in common
except their metre, the latter had better be called a scientific writer, not
a poet, if we are to use 'poet' of the former; (2) similarly, if we suppose
a man to make his mimesis in a medley of all metres, as Chaeremon in
fact did in the Centaur, a recitation-piece in all the various metres, we
still have to call him a poet, a 'maker'.4
So much for the simpler kinds. Some use all the media mentioned,
rhythm, song, and verse: 5 these are dithyrambic and nomic poetry,
Others interpret this as the opposite of 'actions', i.e. 'things that happen to people'.
The order of the following section suggests that here too Aristode is using a
not-x, x method of division, considering first the arts that do not use music and dancing
and next those that do.
l Aristode's complaint seems to be double, that the whole mimetic art that uses
speech but not music and dancing has no name and that the two species, prose and verse
composition, have no names. Lobel makes the sense tidier by conjecturing: 'The art
that uses only speech by itself and that which uses verse ••• have as yet no names.'
4 The point (a sophistical one) seems to be that both on Aristode's criterion of
mimesis and on the ordinary language criterion of verse, Chaeremon belongs to the
generic class 'poet', but that ordinary language can find no specific term for him parallel
to 'hexameter-maker'. The other argument is no better, given Aristode's own commendation of Empedoc1es in the On the Poets as 'Homeric and stylistically excellent,
particularly in his use of metaphor'. In arguing for the necessity of the criterion of
mimesis Aristode is not too particular about the weapons he uses.
5 This is commonly equated with the 'rhythm, harmony, and speech' mentioned
above; but Aristode is here dealing with more complicated elements than in the original
definition. By 'rhythm' here he means dancing, while 'song' is a combination of all
three of the media isolated earlier, and verse a combination of rhythm and speech.
The analysis really applies better to comedy and tragedy than it does to choral lyric,
in which there is no distinction between 'song' and 'verse'; later in the Poetics 'verse' is
used to refer to the dialogue scenes in tragedy as distinct from the choral 'songs'.
I

2

92

ARISTOTLE

tragedy and comedy. But the two former use them all simultaneously,
while the latter use different media in different parts. So much for the
differentiae derived from the media.

(b)
1448a
2

(c)
3

ACCORDING TO DIFFERENCES OF OBJECTS

The objects of this mimesis are people doing things/ and these people
[as represented] must necessarily be either good or bad, this being,
generally speaking, the only line of divergence between characters, since
differences of character just are differences in goodness and badness, or
else they must be better than are found in the world or worse or just the
same, as they are represented by the painters, Polygnotus portraying
them as better, Pauson as worse, and Dionysius as they are;z clearly
therefore each of the varieties of mimesis in question will exhibit these
differences, and one will be distinguishable from another in virtue of
presenting things as different in this way.
These dissimilarities can in fact be found in dancing and instrumental
music, and in the arts using speech and unaccompanied verse: Homer
for instance represents people as better and Cleophon as they are, while
Hegemon of Thasos, the inventor of parodies, and Nicochares, the author
of the Deiliad, represent them as worse; the same is true of dithyrambs
and nomes, where the mimesis can differ as ... ,3 and as that of the Cyclopes
does in Timotheus and PhiIoxenus; this is also the differentia that marks
off tragedy from comedy, since the latter aims to represent people as
worse, the former as better, than the men of the present day.
ACCORDING TO DIFFERENCES OF MODE

There is still a third difference, the mode in which one represents each
of these objects. For one can represent the same objects in the same
media
I Aristode's word prattonton means, for him, 'people performing responsible and
morally characterizable actions'.
Z The second distinction is a refinement on the first, perhaps an afterthought. The
translation 'better than are found in the world' is suggested by Dryden's classification
of the subject-matter of comedy as 'such humours, adventures and designs as are to be
found and met with in the world' (Preface to An Evening's Love, or The Mock Astrologer,
1671). Dryden of course is speaking of comedy as it descends from the post-Aristotelian
New Comedy of Menander and his fellows, which claims to portray people 'as they
are'; the comedy Aristotle is talking about is a comedy of caricature like Pauson's
painting, and nearer to Dryden's 'Farce'. What Aristotle intended by 'better than are
found in the world' is most usefully shown by Nic. Eth. II4SaI9 if.: 'An excellence
beyond the human scale, something heroic and divine, which may be illustrated by the
phrase Homer makes Priam use of Hector to express his signal excellence, "He seemed
the son of a god, not of a mortal man".' I owe this reference to Miss G. M. Matthews.
3 Text defective.

POETICS

93

(i) sometimes in narration and sometimes becoming someone else, as
Homer does, or
(ii) speaking in one's own person without change, or
(iii) with all the people engaged in the mimesis actually doing things.!
These three then, media, objects, and mode, are, as I said at the beginning, the differentiae of poetic mimesis. So, if we use one of them [to
separate poets into classes], Sophocles will be in the same class as Homer,
since both represent people as good, and if we use another, he will be in
the same class as Aristophanes, since they both represent people as
actively doing things.

Digression on the etymological fancies of the Dorians2
Some people say that this verb dran, 'to do', is why plays are called
dramas, because such poets represent people as doing things; and this
is the ground on which the Dorians claim the invention of both tragedy
and comedy. Comedy is claimed by the Megarians, both by those of
mainland Greece, who say it arose when their democracy was established,3
and by those of [Megara Hyblaea in] Sicily, the home of Epicharmus,
who lived well before Chionides and Magnes. 4 Tragedy is claimed by some
of the Peloponnesians. In each case they found their claim on etymology:
they say that while they call outlying villages komai, the Athenians call
them demoi, and they take 'comedy' to be derived not from komazein, 'to
revel', but from the fact that the comic actors wandered among the
villages because driven in contempt from the city; and they say that they 1448b
use the word dran of doing, while the Athenians say prattein.

Conclusion
So much for the number and nature of the differentiae of poetic

mimesis.
I The Greek is perhaps defective and also admits the interpretation '(i) sometimes in
narration, either becoming someone else, as Homer does, or speaking in one's own
person without change, or (ii) with all the people .. .'. The threefold classification given
in the translation is in accordance with Plato's view (Rep. 392 d If.); more important,
it agrees better with Aristode's own insistence on the uniqueness of Homer (pp. 94 f.,
101 f., 123, 125 f.).
2 The position of this digression, carefully segregated from the following serious
discussion of the development of the poetic kinds, seems to show that Aristode thought
Iitde of the Dorian claims.
3 Early in the sixth century.
4 The first known poets of Attic comedy, very litde later, in fact, than Epicharmus.

ARISTOTLE

94

SECTION B. THE PROOF THAT THE KINDS WE ARE INTERESTED
IN DEFINING ARE EACH A COMPLETELY DEVELOPED AND
A SINGLE SPECIES
I.

The origins of poetry

4 Poetry, I believe, has two over-all causes, both of them natural:

(a) Mimesis is innate in human beings from childhood-indeed we
differ from the other animals in being most given to mimesis and in making
our first steps in learning through it-and pleasure in instances of mimesis
is equally general. This we can see from the facts: we enjoy looking at the
most exact portrayals of things we do not like to see in real life, the lowest
animals, for instance, or corpses. This is because not only philosophers,
but all men, enjoy getting to understand something, though it is true
that most people feel this pleasure only to a slight degree; therefore they
like to see these pictures, because in looking at them they come to understand something and can infer what each thing is, can say, for instance,
'This man in the picture is so-and-so'.' If you happen not to have seen
the original, the picture will not produce its pleasure qua instance of
mimesis, but because of its technical finish or colour or for some such
other reason.
(b) As well as mimesis, harmony and rhythm are natural to us, and verses
are obviously definite sections of rhythm.
2.

The development of pre-dramatic poetry

These two were gradually developed by those who had most natural
gift for them. Poetry, arising from their improvisations, split up according
to the authors' divergent characters: the more dignified represented noble
actions and those of no ble men, the less serious those of low-class people;
the one group produced at first invectives, the others songs praising gods
and men. We cannot name any author of a poem of the former kind before
Homer's time, though there were probably many of them, but from
Homer on we do find such poems-his own Margites, for instance, and
others of the kind. These introduced the metre that suited them, stilI
called 'iambic' (from iambizein, 'to lampoon'), because it was the metre of
their lampoons on each other. So some of the ancients produced heroic
[i.e. hexameter] verse and the others iambics.
As well as being the most creative poet of high actions,2 his mimeseis
I The pleasure of understanding and realizing something is for Aristotle basic to
aesthetic pleasure; cf. the fuller discussion in Rhet. I. I37Ia2I ff. (below, p. I34) and
pp. 86 f.
2 The translation is borrowed from Milton (P.R. 4. 266); the word is translated 'good'

POETICS

95

in this kind being the only ones that are not only well done but essentially
dramatic, Homer also first adumbrated the form of comedy by dramatizing
the ridiculous instead of producing invectives; his Margites bears the
same relation to comedy as the Iliad and Odyssey do to tragedy.'
1449a
On the subsequent appearance of tragedy and comedy, those whose
natural bent made lampooners of them turned to comedy, while those
naturally inclined to epic became tragedians, because the new forms were
more ample and more highly esteemed than the old.

3. The development of tragedy
To inquire whether even tragedy [as distinct from epic] is sufficiently
elaborated in its qualitative elements, judging it in itself and in its relation
to the audience, is another story.2 At any rate, after originating in the
improvisations of the leaders of the dithyramb, as comedy did in those
of the leaders of the phallic songs still customary in many. Greek cities,
tragedy gradually grew to maturity, as people developed the capacities
they kept discovering in it, and after many changes it stopped altering,
since it had attained its full growth. The main changes were:
(i) in the number of actors, raised from one to two by Aeschylus, who
made the choral part less important and gave speech the leading role;
Sophocles added a third-and also scene-painting;
(ii) in amplitude: as tragedy developed from the satyr-style, its plots
were at first slight and its expression comical, and it was a long time before
it acquired dignity;
(iii) in metre: the iambic trimeter replaced the trochaic tetrameter,
which had been used before as suitable for a satyr-style poetry, that is,
for productions involving more dancing; when verbal expression came
to the fore, however, nature herself found the right metre, the iambic
being the most speakable of all metres; this we can see from the fact that
it is the one we most often produce accidentally in conversation, where
(for example, at p. 92) or 'noble' (p. 96) when used of persons. For the concept cf.
p. 92, n. 2.
I Aristotle's unwillingness either to distort or accurately to report the facts of history
produces in this section some embarrassment of expression, which has induced some
editors to rearrange the argument in the form Aristotle would have given it if he had
been unscrupulous. The series hymns-Homer-tragedy leads him to posit a similar
series invectives-Homer-comedy. In fact the invention of the iambic trimeter was
attributed to Homer in the Margites, and Archilochus, the great poet of invective, was
later than Homer.
2 Tragedy is more elaborated than epic, as it has more qualitative elements (p. 96).
The 'other story' seems to be given by the deduction of the sufficiency of the qualitative
elements of tragedy on pp. 97 f.

ARISTOTLE

hexameters are rare and only occur when we depart from conversational
tone;
(iv) in the increased number of episodes.
There is no need to say more of this or of the other developments that
gave it beauty; it would take too long to go through them in detail.

4. The development of comedy
5 Comedy is, as I said, a mimesis of people worse than are found in the world

I449b

-'worse' in the particular sense of 'uglier', as the ridiculous is a species
of ugliness; for what we find funny is a blunder that does no serious
damage or an ugliness that does not imply pain, the funny face, for
instance, being one that is ugly and distorted, but not with pain. While
the changes and the authors of the changes in tragedy are known, the
development of comedy is obscure because it was not at first taken
seriously; the chorus, for instance, were for a long time volunteers, and
not provided officially by the archon. The form was already partly fixed
before the first recorded comic poets, and so we do not know who introduced masks, prologues, numerous actors, and so on; the making of
plots, however, certainly came first from Sicily, Crates being the first
Athenian to drop the lampoon form and construct generalized stories or
plots.

SECTION C. APOLOGY FOR POSTPONING THE TREATMENT OF EPIC,
IN DEFIANCE OF CHRONOLOGY

Epic, in so far as it is a sizeable! mimesis in verse of noble personages,
goes along with tragedy, but differs from it in using metre alone [without
music] and in being in narrative form; it also differs in length, tragedy
attempting so far as possible to keep to the limit of one revolution of
the sun or not much more or less, while epic is unfixed in time. This
differentiates them now, but at first tragic practice was the same as epic.
Of their elements some are the same, some peculiar to tragedy, so that any
judge of excellence in tragedy can judge of epic too, since tragedy has
everything that epic has, while epic lacks some of tragedy's elements.
6 I shall deal later with the art of mimesis in hexameters and with comedy;
here I want to talk about tragedy, picking up the definition of its essential
nature that results from what I have said.
I

The text is corrupt and the 'sizeable' is a conjecture.

POETICS
CHAPTER

97

11

THE NATU.RE OF TRAGEDY
SECTION A. THE NATURE OF TRAGEDY ACCORDING TO THE
CATEGORY OF SUBSTANCE

Well then, a tragedy is a mimesis of a high, complete action ('complete' in
the sense that implies amplitude), in speech pleasurably enhanced, the
different kinds [of enhancement] occurring in separate sections, in
dramatic, not narrative form, effecting through pity and fear the catharsis'
of such emotions. By 'speech pleasurably enhanced' I mean that involving
rhythm and harmony or song, by 'the different kinds separately' that
some parts are in verse alone and others in song.
SECTION B. THE NATURE OF TRAGEDY ACCORDING TO THE
CATEGORY OF QUALITY
1.

The deduction of the qualitative elements of tragedy

One can deduce as necessary elements of tragedy Ca) [from the mode] the
designing of the spectacle, since the mimesis is produced by people doing
things; (b) [from the media] song-writing and verbal expression, the
media of tragic mimesis; by 'verbal expression' I mean the composition of
the verse-parts, 2 while the meaning of 'song-writing' is obvious to anybody. [Others can be inferred from (c) the objects of the mimesis:] A
tragedy is a mimesis of an action; action implies people engaged in it;
these people must have some definite moral and intellectual qualities,
since it is through a man's qualities that we characterize his actions,3 1450'
and it is of course with reference to their actions that men are said to
succeed or fail. We therefore have (i) the mimesis of the action, the plot,
by which I mean the ordering of the particular actions; (ii) [the mimesis of]
the moral characters of the personages, namely that [in the play] which
makes us say that the agents have certain moral qualities; (iii) [the
mimesis of] their intellect, namely those parts [of the play] in which they
demonstrate something in speech or deliver themselves of some general
maxim. 4
Cf. below, pp. 132 ff.
2 i.e. of the dialogue parts.
The manuscripts add 'to explain actions we refer to the moral character and
intellect of the person doing them'; this is sensible enough in itself, but it disrupts the
sentence and is clearly an intrusive gloss to explain the preceding clause.
• Throughout the rest of the treatise 'mimesis of character' and 'mimesis of intellect'
are used without square brackets to translate ethos and dianoia in this technical sense.
I

3

8143591

H

ARISTOTLE

So tragedy as a whole will necessarily have six elements, the possession
of which makes tragedy qualitatively distinct [from other literary kinds]:
they are plot, the mimesis of character, verbal expression, the mimesis of
intellect, spectacle, and song-writing. The media of mimesis are two, the
mode one, the objects three, and there are no others. Not a few tragedians
do in fact use these as qualitative elements; indeed virtually I every play
has spectacle, the mimesis of character, plot, verbal expression, song, and
the mimesis of intellect.
2.

(a)

The qualitattve elements ranged in order of importance

THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE PRE-EMINENCE OF PLOT

The most important of these elements is the arrangement of the particular
actions [as the following arguments show]:
(a) A tragedy is [by definition] a mimesis not of people but of their
actions and life. Both success and ill success are success and ill success
in action-in other words the end and aim of human life 2 is doing something, not just being a certain sort of person; and though we consider
people's characters in deciding what sort of persons they are, we call
them successful or unsuccessful only with reference to their actions. 3
So far therefore from the persons in a play acting as they do in order to
represent their characters, the mimesis of their characters is only included
along with and because of their actions. So the particular actions, the plot,
are what the rest of the tragedy is there for,4 and what the rest is there for
is the most important.
1 The manuscripts nonsensically attach this to 'Not a few'; the transposition was
suggested by Bywater.
2 Commonly assumed by the Greeks to be eudaimonia, an assumption that Aristotle
accepts. The word is often rendered by 'happiness', here by 'success'.
3 The content of this passage is Aristotelian, but the word for 'ill success' does not
occur elsewhere in his works; other arguments urged against the passage are unconvincing, though there may be corruption in detail. Whether entirely written by Aristotle
or embodying explanatory additions by somebody else, it is not out of harmony with
the insistence (no doubt against some current opinion) on the primacy of plot over
character.
• Sometimes misleadingly rendered as 'are what tragedy aims at'. But Aristotle is
talking in terms of his own theory of explanation (traditionally called 'the doctrine of the
four causes'); in this teleological explanations ('final causes') are of more than one kind.
Though one sort of 'final cause' is the answer to the question '''Vhat is the purpose of
x 1', another is the answer to the question 'For the sake of what in x is the rest of x
there?'; to take a simple example, one 'final cause' of a knife is cutting, and another is
the cutting edge. The argument here plainly shows that plot is the 'final cause' of tragedy
in the second sense, not in the first. The purpose of tragedy is stated on p. 108, 'the
poet's job is to produce the pleasure springing from pity and fear via mimesis'.

POETICS

99

Cb) [By definition] a work could not be a tragedy if there were no
action. But there could be a tragedy without mimesis of character,
and the tragedies of most of the modems are in fact deficient in it; the
same is true of many other poets, and of painters for that matter, of
Zeuxis, for instance, in comparison with Polygnotus: the latter is good
at depicting character, while Zeuxis' painting has no mimesis of character
to speak of.
(c) If you put down one after another speeches that depicted character,
finely expressed and brilliant in the mImesis of intellect, that would not
do the job that, by definition, tragedy does do, while a tragedy with a
plot, that is, with an ordered series of particular actions, though deficient
in these other points, would do its job much better.
(d) The most attractive things in tragedy, peripeteiai and recognition
scenes, are parts of the plot.
(e) Novices in poetry attain perfection in verbal expression and in the
mimesis of character much earlier than in the ordering of the particular
actions; this is also true of almost all early poets.
(b)

THE STATEMENT OF THE ORDER

The plot therefore is the principle, or one might say the principle of
life,' in tragedy, while the mimesis of character comes second in importance, a relation similar to one we find in painting, where the most beautiful I4S0b
colours, if smeared on at random, would give less pleasure than an uncoloured oudine that was a picture of something. A tragedy, I repeat,
is a mimesis of an action, and it is only because of the action that it is a
mimesis of the people engaged in it. Third comes the mimesis of their
intellect, by which I mean their ability to say what the situation admits
and requires; to do this in speeches is the job of political sense and rhetoric,
since the older poets made their people speak as the former directs, while
the modems make them observe the rules of rhetoric. Of these two, the
mimesis of character is that [in the play] which makes plain the nature of
the moral choices the personages make,2 so that those speeches in which
there is absolutely nothing that the speaker chooses and avoids involve
no mimesis of character. By 'mimesis of intellect' I mean those passages in
which they prove that something is or is not the case or deliver themselves
I The 'principle of life' renders psyche ('sou!'), which stands to the living body in the
same relation as plot to tragedy; it is 'what the rest is there for' as in argument (a), and
it is what the living body essentially is as in argument (b). In traditional language it is
both a 'final cause' and the 'formal cause'. a. De Anima 4ISbSff.
2 After this the manuscripts add 'in cases in which it is not clear whether (?) he chooses
or avoids', a corrupt anticipation of the following clause.

ARISTOTLE

100

of some general statement.' Fourth comes the expression of the spoken
parts, by which I mean, as I said before, the expression of thought in
words; the meaning is the same whether verse or prose is in question.
Of the others, which are there to give pleasure, song-writing is the most
important, while spectacle, though attractive, has least to do with art,
with the art of poetry, that is; for a work is potentially a tragedy2 even
without public performance and players, and the art of the stage-designer
contributes more to the perfection of spectacle than the poet's does.

3. Closer analysis ofplop
(a)

THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A PLOT, WITH REFERENCE
TO ITS DEFINITION AS THE MIMESIS OF A WHOLE ACTION4

(i) The first implication of wholeness: order
7

Now that these definitions are out of the way, I want to consider what the
arrangement of the particular actions should be like, since that is the
prime and most important element of tragedy.
Now, we have settled that a tragedy is a mimesis of a complete, that is,
of a whole action, 'whole' here implying some amplitude (there can be a
whole without amplitude).
By 'whole' I mean 'with a beginning, a middle, and an end'. By
'beginning' [in this context] I mean 'that which is not necessarily the
consequent of something else, but has some state or happening naturally
consequent on it', by 'end' 'a state that is the necessary or usual consequent
of something else, but has itself no such consequent', by 'middle' 'that
which is consequent and has consequents'. Well-()rdered plots, then, will
exhibit these characteristics, and will not begin or end just anywhere.

a. pp.

116 f.
Others interpret 'a tragedy can do its job', making Aristotle say the same as in
c. 26, pp. 131 f. But the point here seems a different one; though an aCIUal, fully realized
performance of a tragedy demands spectacle, the poet has done what he has to do when
he has produced something that is potentially a tragedy. Its staging is not something
that belongs to the poet's art.
3 In this large and important section Aristotle is not yet talking about what is
necessary for a good plot, a subject that he only begins to discuss on p. 106. He is
continuing his analysis of the essential nature of tragedy by considering the minimum
characteristics that a plot must have if it is not to be judged positively defective.
4 It is perhaps worth pointing out that the four essential characteristics are not on a
level, but that the first three are defined in terms of the last. The kind of order, the kind
of ampliIUde, the kind of unity in question are all explained in terms that invoke
probable or necessary connection.
I

2

POETICS

101

(ii) The second implication of wholeness: amplitude
It is not enough for beauty that a thing, whether an animal or anything
else composed of parts, should have those parts well-ordered; since
beauty consists in amplitude as well as in order, the thing must also have
amplitude-and not just any amplitude. Though a very small creature
could not be beautiful, since our view loses all distinctness when it comes
near to taking no perceptible time, an enormously ample one could not
be beautiful either, since our view of it is not simultaneous, so that we
lose the sense of its unity and wholeness as we look it over; imagine, for
instance, an animal a thousand miles long. Animate and inanimate bodies,
then, must have amplitude, but no more than can be taken in at one
view; and similarly a plot must have extension, but no more than can be
easily remembered. What is, for the poetic art, the limit of this extension?
Certainly not that imposed by the contests and by perception I-if a
hundred plays had to be performed during the festival, they would time
the performances by the hour glass, t as they say once on another occasion ... tz As the limit imposed by the actual nature of the thing, one may
suggest 'the ampler the better, provided it remains clear as a whole', or,
to give a rough specification, 'sufficient amplitude to allow a probable or
necessary succession of particular actions to produce a change from bad
to good or from good to bad fortune'.

145 1a

(iii) The third implication of wholeness: unity
Unity of plot is not, as some think, achieved by writing about one man; 8
for just as the one substance admits innumerable incidental properties,
which do not, some of them, make it a such-and-such,3 so one man's
actions are numerous and do not make up any single action. That is
why I think the poets mistaken who have produced Heracleids or Theseids
or other poems of the kind, in the belief that the plot would be one just
because Heracles was one. Homer especially shows his superiority in
taking a right view here-whether by art or nature: in writing a poem on
Odysseus he did not introduce everything that was incidentally true of
him, being wounded on Parnassus, for instance, or pretending to be mad
at the mustering of the fleet, neither of which necessarily or probably
I The remark is puzzling, in view of the preceding discussion; if Aristotle means the
perception of a particular audience, its power of attending to a play, the audience in
question must at any rate be presumed defective (cf. perhaps p. 107 below).
2 The text is corrupt and its reference uncertain.
3 The interpretation is that ofVahlen and is the only one that does justice to the Greek.
The analogy is drawn from logic. To give an example, some of the statements to be made
about a coffee-pot will define it as a piece of crockery, those plus some more statements
will define it as a coffee-pot; but a great many statements that are incidentally true of
it will only detail its life history and not define it as a member of any species.

102

ARISTOTLE

implied the other at all; instead he composed the Odyssey about an action
that is one in the sense I mean, and the same is true of the Iliad. In the
other mimetic arts a mimesis is one if it is a mimesis of one object; and in
the same way a plot, being a mimesis of an action, should be a mimesis of
one action and that a whole one, with the different sections so arranged
that the whole is disturbed by the transposition and destroyed by the
removal of anyone of them; for if it makes no visible difference whether
a thing is there or not, that thing is no part of the whole.

9

145Ib

(iv) The fourth implication of wholeness: probable and necessary connection
What I have said also makes plain that the poet's job is saying not what
did happen but the sort of thing that would happen, that is, what can
happen in a strictly probable or necessary sequence. The difference
between the historian and the poet is not merely that one writes verse
and the other prose-one could turn Herodotus' work into verse and it
would be just as much history as before; the essential difference is that
the one tells us what happened and the other the sort of thing that would
happen. That is why poetry is at once more like philosophy and more
worth while than history, since poetry tends to make general statements,
while those of history are particular. A 'general statement' means [in this
context] one that tells us what sort of man would, probably or necessarily,
say or do what sort of thing, and this is what poetry aims at, though it
attaches proper names; a particular statement on the other hand tells us
what Alcibiades, for instance, did or what happened to him.!
That poetry does aim at generality has long been obvious in the case of
comedy, where the poets make up the plot from a series of probable
happenings and then give the persons any names they like, instead of
writing about particular people as the lampooners did. In tragedy, however, they still stick to the actual names; this is because it is what is
possible that arouses conviction, and while we do not without more ado
believe that what never happened is possible, what did happen is clearly
I It is hard to be temperate in one's admiration for the intellectual power and refinement of analysis that Aristode displays in this argument. One should remember that to
the Greeks Oedipus was just as much a historical personage as Alcibiades. The distinction between what a poet means when he says 'X did such-and-such' and what an
historian means when he makes an identical statement is not in itself obvious and was
not grasped by most ancient historians. The historian must not suppress the fact that
does not fit in, he must not bridge the gaps in his evidence with plausible conjecture
presented as a statement of fact. The poet, on the other hand, cannot say anything that
his audience will not take to be relevant to the picture they assume he is presenting,
and this picture is an investigation of moral possibilities. Poetry is therefore like philosophy (or like science); its statements, though in form the same as the historians', are
in fact taken to be statements of the greatest generality that its subject-matter allows.

POETICS

103

possible, since it would not have happened if it were not. Though as a
matter of fact, even in some tragedies most names are invented and only
one or two well known: in Agathon's Antheus, for instance, the names
as well as the events are made up, and yet it gives just as much pleasure.
So one need not try to stick at any cost to the traditional stories, which are
the subject of tragedies; indeed the attempt would be absurd, since even
what is well known is well known only to a few, but gives general pleasure
for all that.
It is obvious from all this that the poet should be considered a maker
of plots, not of verses, since he is a poet qua maker of mimesis and the
objects of his mimesis are actions. 1 Even if it is incidentally true that the
plot he makes actually happened, that does not mean he is not its maker;
for there is no reason why some things that actually happen should not
be the sort of thing that would probably happen,z and it is in virtue of
that aspect of them that he is their maker.

(v) Plots that Jail to exhibit the essential characteristics
Of defective 3 plots or actions the worst are the episodic, those, I mean,
in which the succession of the episodes is neither probable nor necessary;
bad poets make these on their own account, good ones because of the
judges;4 for in aiming at success in the competition and stretching the
plot more than it can,bear they often have to distort the natural order.

(b)

A FIFTH REQUIREMENT, SUGGESTED BY THE MENTION OF PITY
AND FEAR IN THE DEFINITION: SURPRISE

Tragedy is a mimesis not only of a complete action, but also of things
arousing pity and fear, emotions most likely to be stirred when things
happen unexpectedly but because of each other (this arouses more
surprise than mere chance events, since even chance events seem more
marvellous when they look as if they were meant to happen-take the
case of the statue of Mitys in Argos killing Mitys' murderer by falling on
I It is sometimes obscured that Aristotle's purpose here and on p. 91 above is not
to deny the necessity of verse to poetry (though he might have done, if pushed), but to
assert the necessity of mimesis.
Z The manuscripts add 'and that can happen', perhaps defensible as a piece of donnish
humour, but suspect because it is absent from the Arabic version.
3 This reading is due to conjecture; the manuscripts have 'Of simple plots .• .'. It is
not a serious objection to this that we have not yet been introduced to the simple plot
(below, p. 104); what does matter is that a reference to the simple plot is irrelevant in
the context.
4 Most manuscripts have 'because of the actors'; for the bad influence of the judges,
cf. Plato's remark (above, pp. 83 f.).

1452"

ARISTOTLE
4
him as he looked at it; for we do not think that things like this are merely
random); so such plotsI will necessarily be the best.

10

(c)
10

Some plots are simple, some complex, since the actions of which the
plots are mimeseis fall naturally into the same two classes. By 'simple
action' I mean one that is continuous in the sense defined 2 and is a unity
and where the change of fortune takes place without peripeteia or recognition, by 'complex' one where the change of fortune is accompanied by
peripeteia or recognition or both. The peripeteia and recognition should
arise just from the arrangement of the plot, so that it is necessary or
probable that they should follow what went before; for there is a great
difference between happening next and happening as a result.

(d)
11

THE SPECIES OF PLOT

THE ELEMENTS OF PLOT

(i) Peripeteia
A peripeteia occurs when the course of events takes a turn to the
opposite in the way described,3 the change being also probable or necessary in the way I said. For example, in the Oedipus, when the 4 man came
and it seemed that he would comfortS Oedipu sand free him from his fear
about his mother, by revealing who he was he in fact did the opposite.
Again in the Lynceus, Lynceus was being led off and it seemed that he
would be put to death and that Danaus who was with him would kill him,
but the earlier actions produced Danaus' death and Lynceus' release.
(ii) Recognition
Recognition is, as its name indicates, a change from ignorance to knowledge, tending either to affection or to enmity; it determines in the direction
of good or ill fortune the fates of the people involved. The best sort of
recognition is that accompanied by peripeteia, like that in the Oedipus.
I Those where things happen unexpectedly but because of each other.
• That is, one that has probable or necessary connection.
3 That is, in a way involving surprise.
4 The Corinthian shepherd.
S Or 'came with the intention of comforting'. The construction used is the same here
and in the Lynceus example, where one can certainly say that it was not Lynceus'
intention to be put to death. In view of this it is unnecessary to attribute to Aristotle
the misstatement that the shepherd came with the intention of freeing Oedipus from
his fear about his mother, or even with the expectation of doing so. The frustrated
expectation seems to be felt not by the characters but by the audience, who are here,
as on p. 103 above, taken not to be very familiar with the events of heroic legend.

POETICS

105

There are of course other kinds of recognition. For a recognition of
the sort described can be a recognition of inanimate objects, indeed of
quite indifferent ones, and one can also recognize whether someone has
committed an act or not. But the one mentioned has most to do with
the plot, 'that is, most to do with the action; for a recognition accompanied
by peripeteia in this way will involve either pity or fear, and tragedy is by
definition a mimesis of actions that rouse these emotions; it is moreover
such recognitions that lead to good or bad fortune.
Since recognition involves more than one person, in some cases only
one person will recognize the other, when it is clear who the former is, and
sometimes each has to recognize the other: Orestes, for example, recognized Iphigenia from her sending the letter, but a second recognition
was necessary for her to recognize him.
(iii) Pathos
These then are two elements of the plot, and a third is pathos. I have
dealt with the first two, peripeteia and recognition. A pathos is an act
involving destruction or pain, for example deaths on stage and physical
agonies and woundings and so on.
So much for the parts of tragedy that one ought to use as qualitative
elements.

SECTION C. THE NATURE OF TRAGEDY ACCORDING TO THE
CATEGORY OF QUANTITY

Now for the category of quantity and the quantitative divisions of a
tragedy: they are prologue, episode, exodos, choral part, the last being
divided into parodos and stasimon; the last two are common to all plays,
while some have as well songs from the actors and kommoi.
The prologue is the complete section of a tragedy before the entrance
of the chorus, an episode the complete section of a tragedy between
complete choral odes, the exodos a complete section of a tragedy not
followed by a choral ode. Of the choral part, the parodos is the first
complete utterance of the chorus, a stasimon a choral song not using the
anapaestic dimeter or trochaic tetrameter, I a kommos a lament shared by
the chorus and the actors.
Having dealt beforehand with the parts of tragedy that one ought to
I The anapaestic dimeter is a marching metre, normal in chorus entries, the tetrameter a running metre appropriate to a hasty choral entry. Cf. A. M. Dale, Collected
Papers, Cambridge, 1969, pp. 34 If.

1452b

12

ARISTOTLE

106

use as qualitative elements, I have now dealt with the category of quantity
and the quantitative divisions of a tragedy. I
CHAPTER

III

EXCELLENCE IN TRAGEDY
SECTION A. WITH RESPECT TO PLOT

13 What ought one to aim at and beware of in composing plots? And what

is the source of the tragic effect? These are the questions that naturally
follow from what I have now dealt with.
I.

Things to aim at and beware of

WeB, the arrangement of tragedy at its best should be complex, not
simple, and it should also present a mimesis of things that arouse fear and
pity, as this is what is peculiar to the tragic mimesis.
So it is clear that one should not show virtuous ·men passing from good
to bad fortune, since this does not arouse fear or pity, but only a sense of
outrage. Nor should one show bad men passing from bad to good fortune,
as this is less tragic than anything, since it has none of the necessary
14533 requirements; it neither satisfies our human feeling nor arouses pity and
fear. Nor should one show a quite wicked man passing from good to bad
fortune; it is true that such an arrangement would satisfy our human
feeling, but it would not arouse pity or fear, since the one is felt for someone who comes to grief without deserving it, and the other for someone
like us (pity, that is, for the man who does not deserve his fate, and fear for
someone like us); so this event will not arouse pity or fear. So we have
left the man between these. He is one who is not pre-eminent in moral
virtue, who passes to bad fortune not through vice or wickedness, but
because of some piece of ignorance, and who is of high repute and great
good fortune, like Oedipus and Thyestes and the splendid men of such
families. 2
I This sentence repeats almost exactly that at the beginning of the section, importing
as well a late form not used by Aristotle; such a dreary piece of scholasticism is unlike
him. The whole discussion of tragedy under the category of quantity has been challenged, and may be an interpolation. Yet it stands where it should stand, concluding the
analysis of the nature of tragedy and preceding the consideration of its virtues, and
though bald is not absurd in content. Of the ten categories that belong to the Aristotelian
theory of predication, it is of course these three, substance, quality, and quantity, that
provide the definition of a thing's essential nature; the other categories only state
things that are incidentally true of it at a particular time and place.
2 Aristotle's thought in this section is best illuminated by the discussion in Rhetoric
2. 9 of the emotions that expel pity, and particularly by the discussion of 'justified

POETICS

107

So the good plot must have a single line of development, not a double
one as some people say;' that line should go from good fortune to bad
and not the other way round; the change should be produced not through
wickedness, but through some htrge-scale piece of ignorance; the person
ignorant should be the sort of man I have described-certainly not a
worse man, though perhaps a better one.
This is borne out by the facts: at first the poets recounted any story
that came to hand, but nowadays the best tragedies are about a few families
only, for example, Alcmaeon, Oedipus, Orestes, Meleager, Thyestes, Telephus, and others whose lot it was to suffer or commit fearful acts.
Well then, the best tragedy, judged from the standpoint of the tragic
art, comes from this sort of arrangement. That is why those who censure
Euripi~es for doing this in his tragedies and making many of them end
with disaster are making just the same mistake. 2 For this is correct in
the way I said. The greatest proof of this is that on the stage and in the
contests such plays are felt to be the most properly tragic, if they are well
managed, and Euripides, even if he is a bad manager in the other points,
is at any rate the most tragic of the poets. 3
Second comes the sort of arrangement that some people say is the best:
this is the one that has a double arrangement of the action like the
Odyssey, and ends with opposite fortunes for the good and bad people.
It is thought to be the best because-of the weakness of the audiences;
for the poets follow the lead of the spectators and make plays to their
indignation' (nemesiin). This emotion has several aspects, pain at the undeserved misfortunes of the good, pain at the undeserved good fortune of the wicked, pleasure at the
deserved misfortunes of the wicked; these three aspects correspond to the three cases
that Aristotle here excludes. 'What satisfies our human feeling' (to philanthropon) seems
here to be the opposite of 'the morally outraging' (to miaron).
Aristotle clearly has some difficulty in reconciling the need to avoid 'justified indignation' with the requirement that the characters of high poetry should be good. To do so
he invokes hamartia as the cause of their misfortune. In the context two things are
necessary, that the tragic figure should in some sense be responsible for his fate (to
avoid the first case), and that his fate should nevertheless be worse than he deserves (to
avoid the third case); that is, a hamartia here is 'a going wrong that is venial'. Other
discussions (especially Nic. Eth. 3. 1-2) show that it is venial because the character did
not know what he was doing; the same act done in full knowledge would be a crime. In
the case of Oedipus, for instance, the hamartia is simply and solely the murder of Laius
and the marriage with Jocasta, in ignorance of the fact that they were his parents. The
Bradleyan notion popular among English critics that the hamartia is a fault of character
is of course excluded by the description of the hamartia as large-scale; a large-scale
fault of character is not, in Aristotle's view, venial.
I See below, n. 2.
2 They make the same mistake as the 'some people' mentioned above and below,
those who prefer a happy ending for the good.
3 'Most tragic' must mean 'best at arousing pity and fear'.

ARISTOTLE

108

specifications. But this is not the pleasure proper to tragedy, but rather
belongs to comedy; for in comedy those who are most bitter enemies
throughout the plot, as it might be Orestes and Aegisthus, I are reconciled
at the end and go off and nobody is killed by anybody.
2.

1453b
14

The source of the tragic effect

Now though pity and fear can be elicited by the spectacle, they can also
be elicited just by the arrangement of the particular actions [that make
up the plot], and this is a prior consideration 2 and the sign of a better
poet. For the plot ought to be so composed that even without seeing the
action, a man who just hears what is going on shudders and feels pity
because of what happens; this one would feel on hearing the plot of the
Oedipus, for instance. But to produce this effect via the spectacle has
less to do with the art of tragedy and needs external aids. To go further
and use the spectacle to produce something that is merely monstrous,
instead of something that rouses fear, is to depart entirely from tragedy.
For one should look to tragedy for its own pleasure, not just any pleasure;
and since the poet's job is to produce the pleasure springing from pity
and fear via mimesis, this clearly ought to be present in the elements of
the action.
What sort of events, then, do seem apt to rouse fear, or [rather] pity?
This is my next subject. In such actions, people must do something to
those closely connected with them, or to enemies, or to people to whom
they are indifferent. Now, if it is a case of two enemies, this arouses no
particular pity, whether the one damages the other or only intends to;
or at least, pity is felt only at the pathos 3 considered in itself. The same
is true in the case when people are indifferent to each other. The cases
we must look for are those where the pathos involves people closely
connected, for instance where brother kills brother, son father, mother
son, or son mother---or if not kills, then means to kill, or does some other
act of the kind.
Well, one cannot interfere with the traditional stories, cannot, for
instance, say that Clytaemestra was not killed by Orestes or Eriphyle by
Alcmaeon; what one should do is invent for oneself and use the traditional
material well. Let me explain more clearly what I mean by 'well'. One
can make the act be committed as the ancient poets did, that is, with the
I In tragedy, naturally. Aristotle is denied his joke by those who either hunt solemnly
for a comedy on the topic of Orestes and Aegisthus or take this to be a reference to a
hypothetical third form of tragedy, with a happy ending for everybody.
• Prior both in time and in importance, as it belongs to the poetic art proper; the
point is the same as that made about spectacle on p. 100 above.
3 Cf. above, p. 105.

POETICS

log

agents knowing and aware [whom they are damaging]; even Euripides has
the example of Medea killing her children with full knowledge. [And
they can have knowledge and not act].' Or they can commit the deed that
rouses terror without knowing to whom they are doing it, and later
recognize the connection, like Sophocles' Oedipus; this indeed happens
outside the play, but we have examples in the tragedy itself, for example,
Astydamas' Alcmaeon and Telegonus in the Wounded Odysseus. 2 Again,
apart from these one might through ignorance intend to do something
irreparable, and then recognize the victim-to-be before doing it. These
are the only possible ways, as they must either do it or not, and in knowledge or ignorance.
The worst of these is to have the knowledge and the intention and
then not do it; for this is both morally outraging and untragic-'untragic'
because it involves no pathos. That is why nobody does behave in this 1454a
way except very rarely, as Haemon, for example, means to kill Creon
in the Antigone. 3 The second worst is doing it: the better form of this is
when the character does it in ignorance, and recognizes his victim afterwards; for this involves no feeling of outrage and the recognition produces
lively surprise. But the best is the last, for example, the case in the Cresphontes4 where Merope means to kill her son and does not, but recognizes
him instead, and the case involving brother and sister in the Iphigenia in
Tauris; again in the Helle the son recognized his mother when on the
point of giving her up.s
I In view of the last sentence of the paragraph this addition from the Arabic
translation seems necessary.
• The Odysseus Acanthoplex of Sophocles.
3 The incident is not shown but described in three lines of Sophocles' messenger's
speech (1232 fT.).
4 Of Euripides.
5 No amount of special pleading can do away with the fact that in commending this
last case Aristotle is commending a situation that leads to a happy ending for the good.
This passage is therefore in downright contradiction with the censure of the happy
ending on pp. 107 f., and it is hardly possible to believe that it forms part of the same chain
of thought. Moreover the next paragraph follows more happily on the words 'or if not
kills, then means to kill, or does some other act of the kind' than it does on anything
else in the section. Bywater is therefore probably right in taking the two paragraphs
from 'Well, one cannot interfere .. .' to ' ... giving her up' to be a later addition made
by Aristotle himself to his own text and enshrining a change of mind. He cannot be
right about the reason for the change of mind, which he finds in Aristotle's 'somewhat
tardy recognition of the necessity of avoiding' the morally outraging; the recognition
is so far from tardy that it has dominated the discussion from the beginning of c. 13, and
in any case the tragic situation where the deed is done in ignorance is expressly said to
involve no feeling of outrage. There seems little to be done with the change of mind
but to accept it. However surprising it may seem to people in full strength, Aristotle is
not after all the only great man to pass in later years from a preference for tragedy to
a preference for tragicomedy; Shakespeare and Sophocles are notable examples.

IIO

ARISTOTLE

As I said before, this is why tragedies are about very few families.
As it was not art but chance that led the poets in their search to the
discovery of how to produce this effect in their plots, they have to go to
the families in which such patM occurred.
So much for the arrangeme~t of the particular acts and the qualities
required of plots.
SECTION B. WITH RESPECT TO CHARACTER

IS In the representation of character, there are four things that one ought

to aim at:
(a) First and foremost, the characters represented should be morally
good. The speech or action will involve mimesis of character if it
makes plain, as said before, the nature of the person's moral choice, and
the character represented will be good if the choice is good. This is
possible in each class: for example, a woman is good and so is a slave,
though the one is perhaps inferior, and the other generally speaking
low-grade.
(b) The characters represented should be suitable: for example, the
character represented is brave, I but it is not suitable for a woman to be
brave or clever in this way.2
(c) They should be life-like; this is different from the character's
being good and suitable in the way I used 'suitable'.3
.
(d) They should be consistent: for even if the subject of the mimesis is
an inconsistent person, and that is the characteristic posited of him,
still he ought to be consistently inconsistent.
An example of unnecessary badness of character is Menelaus in
the Orestes,4 of the unsuitable or inappropriate Odysseus' lament in the
Scylla s and Melanippe's speech,6 of the inconsistent Iphigenia in the
Iphigenia at Aulis, as the girl who pleads for her life is quite different
from the later one.
In the representation of character as well as in the chain of actions
one ought always to look for the necessary or probable, so that it is
And therefore meets the requirement of being morally good.
Cf. Politics I. 5, and 1277b21 ff., for the difference between the virtues of men and
women, even when their virtues are called by the same name.
3 It is not clear what Aristotle means by this requirement, especially as he either did
not give or the tradition has lost the example ofits violation.
4 His cowardice in 682-715. Else rightly argues that this and the other examples
given are, when we can check them, 'unnecessary' because they do not contribute to the
action of the play, which would be unaffected whether they were there or not.
S The example does not come from tragedy, but from a dithyramb by Timotheus.
6 In Euripides' Melanippe the Wise Woman.
I

2

POETICS

III

necessary or probable that a person like this speaks or acts as he does,
and necessary or probable that this happens after that. Clearly then,
the denouements of plots ought to arise just from the mimesis of
character,! and not from a contrivance, a/deus ex machina, as in the Medea
and in the events in the Iliad about the sering off.2 The contrivance should
be used instead for things outside thb play, either all that happened
beforehand that a human being could not know, or all that happens later
and needs foretelling and reporting; for we attribute omniscience to the
gods. In the particular actions themselves there should be nothing
irrational, and if there is it should be outside the tragedy, like that of
Sophocles' Oedipus. 3
Since a tragedy is a mimesis of people better than are found in the world,
one ought to do the same as the good figure-painters; for they too give
us the individual form, but though they make people lifelike they represent
them as more beautiful than they are. Similarly the poet too in representing
people as irascible and lazy and morally deficient in other ways like that,
ought nevertheless to make them good, as Homer makes Achilles both
good and an example of harsh self-wiI1.4
One must watch out for all these points, and also for the errors against 5
the perceptions necessarily attending on the poetic art; for in these
perceptions too one can often go wrong. But I have said enough about
them in my published works.

1454b

DIGRESSION ON VARIOUS TOPICS OF INTEREST TO THE
PRACTISING PLAYWRIGHT6
I.

Recognition

I gave before the genus definition of recognition. Now for its species:
(a) The first and least artistic (and the one most used because people
I This is the reading of the sixth-century Syriac translation and is the only one that
allows all this chapter, apart from the last sentence (below, n. 5), to deal with character.
The rest of the evidence for the text has 'should arise from the plot itself'. If this is
right, we must suppose that the bundle of practical hints for playwrights that occupies
chapters 16-18 and interrupts the orderly development of the treatise begins with this
sentence, and not with the last sentence of c. 15 or the first of c. 16 (below, n. 6).
2 Probably Athene's intervention at Iliad 2. 166 If.
3 Cf. below, p. 126.
4 The last clause renders Lobel's conjecture.
s Or 'arising from'. The text and interpretation are uncertain. The sentence seems to
have some relation to the discussion of poetic imagination on p. I 13 below.
6 The discussion of excellence in tragedy, which proceeds from plot (cc. 13-14) and
character (c. 15) to the representation of intellect (c. 19) and verbal expression (cc. 19 If.),
is suspended, and we have three chapters which nobody would have planned to put
where we find them, though they are indubitably Aristotelian.

16

II2

ARISTOTLE

can think of nothing better) is recognition by visible signs. These signs
may be birthmarks, like 'the spear the earth-born bear' or stars like those
Carcinus supposed in his Thyestes, or acquired after birth; there are two
kinds of the latter, bodily onesJike scars, or external ones, like necklaces
and the recognition by means of the cradle in Sophocles' Tyro. Even
such signs can be well or badly handled: for example, Odysseus' scar
leads to his being recognized in one way by his nurse and in another by
the swineherds; recognitions like the latter, which are just meant to
convince [the other characters in the poem], are less artistic, and so are all
others similarly contrived; those that spring from a peripeteia, like that
in the Bath episode, are better.!
(b) The next are those manufactured by the poet: this makes them
inartistic. An example is Orestes' making himself known in the Iphigenia
in Tauris; for she herself was recognized by means of her letter, but
Orestes says without more ado what the poet wants him to say, not what
the plot demands. So this is quite near the previous fault, since it would
have been possible for him to bring some tokens too. There is also the
'voice of the shuttle' in Sophocles' Tereus. 2
(c) The third is by means of memory, that is, when one's awareness is
1455a roused by seeing something: for example, in Dicaeogenes' Cyprians, he
sees the picture and bursts into tears, and in the story of Alcinous Odysseus
is reminded by listening to the harpist, and weeps; this leads to the
recognition in each case.
(d) The fourth is recognition on the basis of reasoning: in the Choephoroe, for instance, we have the argument 'Somebody like me has come;
nobody but Orestes is like me; so Orestes has come'.3 Another example
is the way the sophist Polyidus dealt with Iphigenia; it was natural, he
thought, for Orestes to argue that his sister had been sacrificed and now
it was his turn to be sacrificed. Another is in Theodectes' Tydeus to the
effect that in coming to find his son he was losing his own life. Again, in
the Sons of Phineus, when the women saw the place they inferred that
they were destined to die there, since that was where they had been
exposed.
There is also a composite kind involving a false inference on the part
of the other character. An example of this is in Odysseus the False Messenger. For that Odysseus and only he can string the bow is something
The Bath episode is the recognition by Eurycleia in Odyssey 19.
Philomela told her story by weaving it, as her tongue had been cut out.
3 Electra does not use this dubious bit of reasoning to help her recognize Orestes; he
recognizes her because he hears her producing it in lines 164 if. Her recognition of him
is 'manufactured by the poet', i.e. he simply declares who he is (219) and also produces
tokens (225 if.: the lock fits the place on his head from which it was cut and he has a
robe that Electra embroidered). Editors have failed to see this.
I

2

POETICS

II3

manufactured by the poet, and there is a hypothesis 'If he said that he
would know the bow that he has not seen', I but to construct the plot so
that it looks as if he will recognize him through this [false inference] is
[the case of] paralogism [being described].z
(e) The best kind of all is that which arises from the actions alone,
with the surprise developing through a series of likelihoods; examples are
that in Sophodes' Oedipus and Euripides' Iphigenia in Tauris; for it was
likely that she would want to send a letter. 3 Only such recognitions are
really free from manufactured signs and necklaces. The next best are
those that come from reasoning.

2.

Poetic imagination

In composing plots and working them out so far as verbal expression 17
goes, the poet should, more than anything else, put things before his eyes,
as he then sees the events most vividly as if he were actually present,
and can therefore find what is appropriate and be aware of the opposite.
The censure on Carcinus is an indication of this: that was a matter of
Amphiaraus' coming from the temple, which would have escaped notice
ifithad not been seen, but fell flat on the stage, because the audience made
a fuss about it. So far as possible one should also work it out with the
appropriate figures. 4 For given the same natural endowment, people who
actually feel passion are the most convincing; that is, the person who most
realistically expresses distress is the person in distress and the same is true
of a person in a temper. That is why poetry is the work of a genius rather
than of a madman; for the genius is by nature adaptable, while the madman is degenerate. s
I Taking this to be a hypothesis entertained by one of the characters and meaning
'Ifhe truly says that he will recognize the bow that he has not, since his arrival in Ithaca,
seen', one can see that the character might falsely infer 'He is Odysseus'. The false
inference is the fallacy ofinferring the antecedent from the consequent; below, p. 126.
Z Text and interpretation are a matter of speculation. The false inference might be
made by the audience instead of by another character, and we do not know whether the
work discussed is a play or the relevant part of the Odyssey.
3 Iph. Taur. 725-803.
• Le. of speech and thought. Others interpret 'gestnres'.
5 The manuscripts have 'That is why poetry is the work of a genius or of a madman',
in conjunction with which the next clause must be interpreted 'for the genius is by
nature adaptable, while the madman is beside himself'; if this is right Aristotle is placidly
assenting en passant to Plato's account of poetic mania (above, p. 75), though that
account can hardly be reconciled with the demands he himself makes on the poet in this
discussion. This attitude is, to say the least, less to be expected than that of tacit dissent
from a Platonic paradox. The pseudo-Aristotelian Problems (954) implies that both
madmen and geniuses share the temperament later called 'melancholy adust', but that in

8143591

I

ARISTOTLE

Whether the argument of a play is pre-existent or whether one is
I455b inventing it oneself, one should set it out in general terms, and only
then make it into episodes and extend it. By 'setting it out in general
terms' I mean, to take the case of the Iphigenia in Tauris: [before the
action proper begins] a girl was sacrificed and disappeared without the
sacrificers knowing what had happened to her, and she was settled in
another country where there was a law that ont,! sacrificed strangers to
the goddess; she was installed as priestess of this rite ; [then in the action
proper] it came about later that the priestess's brother arrived (that he
came because of an oracle and his purpose in coming are things outside
the action); anyway he came and was captured and when on the point
of being sacrificed disclosed himself, either as in Euripides' poem or
as in Polyidus,I saying, that is, as was natural, that it turned out that he
was destined to be sacrificed as well as his sister; and this recognition
produced his rescue. After this one should come to adding the names
and making the episodes. Take care that the episodes are relevant; for
example, in the case of Orestes in the Iphigenia such episodes are the fit
of madness that led to his capture, and his escape through being purified.
In plays episodes are brief, but epic uses them to increase its length.
The Odyssey, for instance, has a very brief argument: [as preliminary to
the action] a man is away from home for many years and jealously
watched by Poseidon and has lost his followers; moreover at home his
affairs are such that his property is being wasted by suitors and plots
laid against his· son; [and in the action proper] he comes home in dire
distress and after disclosing himself makes an attack and destroys his
enemies without being killed himself. This is what is proper to the
action; the rest of the poem is episodes.
the genius 'the excessive heat has sunk to a moderate amount'; it also contains the significant remark that 'Maracus the Syracusan was even a better poet when he was mad',
an example so remote from the main stream of poetry and so cautious in expression that
it is clear that the author of the Problems, at any rate, did not think poetic mania very
common. The manuscript tradition has been challenged by three people in whose
company it is a comfort to be, Castelvetro, Dryden, and Tyrwhitt; there is also a passage
in which Coleridge, though without reference to Aristotle, fascinatingly makes the same
point (Table Talk, May I, 1833):
, "Great wits are sure to madness near allied" says Dryden, and true so far as this,
that genius of the highest kind implies an unusual intensity of the modifying power,
which, detached from the discriminative and reproductive power, might conjure a
plaited straw into a royal diadem: but it would be at least as true, that great genius is
most alien from madness, yea, divided from it by an impassable mountain,-nameiy,
the activity of thought and vivacity of the accumulative memory, which are no less
essential constituents of "great wit".'
I Above, p. II2. Aristotle's expression here rather implies that Polyidus produced
this criticism in a poem, not in a critical work, i.e. that he made his criticism by managing
the recognition differently.

POETICS

lIS

3. Complicati01z and denouement (desis and lusis)
Part of every tragedy is the complication, part the denouement: the 18
preliminaries and often some of the action proper are the complication,
the rest the denouement. By 'complication' I mean the section from the
beginning to the last point before he begiI).s to change to good or bad
fortune, by 'denouement' the part from the beginning of the change to
the end; for example, in Theodectes' Lynceus the complication is made
up of the preliminaries, the kidnapping of the child and their being
found out, the denouement is everything from the capital charge to
the end.
4. The species of tragedy

Tragedy has four species,' the complicated, whose entire nature depends
on peripeteia and recognition, the tragedy of pathos, for example those
about Aias and Ixion, the tragedy of character, for example the Phthiotides 1456a
and the Peleus, while the fourth is spectacle,z like the Phorcides and
Prometheus and any set in hell.
Preferably, of course, one should try to have all four, but if not, to
have the most important and as many as may be, especially given the way
people criticize poets nowadays; for since there have been poets good in
each kind, they demand that a poet should all by himself surpass the
peculiar excellence of each of them. It is fair too to say that tragedies are
the same or different principally on the basis of their plots, that is, when
they have the same complication and denouement. Many can manage the
first but not the second, but one should always be master of both.

5. The selection of tragic material
One ought to remember what I have often said and not make an epic
body of material into a tragedy (by 'epic' I mean one containing many
stories), as if, for instance, one were to compose a play on the whole story
of the Iliad. For in epic because of its length the parts can have a size
that suits them, whereas in plays things turn out quite contrary to what
one expected. We can find a proof of this in the poets who have dealt
with the whole of the sack of Troy and not with a part of it as Euripides
did, or with the story of Niobe and not in the way Aeschylus did; such
I The manuscripts add 'for that was the number of the elements mentioned', a
statement that has no possible reference; if Aristotle made it, he had forgotten his own
analysis.
2 The reading is uncertain.

II6

ARISTOTLE

poets are either hissed off the stage or do badly in the contest-even
Agathon was hissed off just for this reason.

6. The element of surprise

In peripeteiai and also in simple plots poets aim at the effects they want
by means of surprise, I as surprise is tragic and satisfies our human feelin g. Z
This happens when a clever scoundrel is deceived, like Sisyphus, and a
courageous wrongdoer worsted. For this is not only surprising but likely
in the way described by Agathon, when he said it is likely that many
things should happen contrary to likelihood.

7. The treatment of the chorus
One should regard the chorus too as one of the actors, and as a part of the
whole and taking part in the action; that is, one should follow Sophocles'
practice rather than Euripides'. In poets apart from these,3 the songs
have no more to do with the plot than with some quite other tragedy; this
is why they [nowadays] sing interpolated songs (the first who began this
practice was Agathon). But it is absurd, for there is no difference between
singing interpolated songs and transferring a speech or a whole episode
from one play to another.
SECTION C. WITH RESPECT TO THE MIMESIS OF
INTELLECT4

19 As I have dealt with the other qualitative elements, I now have to talk

about the representation of intellect and about verbal expression. The
representation of intellect we may take to be covered by the Rhetoric; for
it does belong rather to that inquiry. What is involvcd in the representation
of intellect is every effect to be produced by speech. Its sections are proof
and disproof, rousing emotion (pity, fear, anger, and so on), making a
14S6b thing look important or unimportant. 5 OearIy in the plot too one ought
I The manuscripts have 'to a surprising degree'; the translation is of Castelvetro's
conjecture.
2 Above, pp. 106 f.
3 To a modern reader the failure to take Aeschylus into account is notable. One may
remark also that Aeschylus is thought to have composed a trilogy on the main action
of the Iliad (Myrmidons, Nereids, Phrygians), something derisively mentioned only as
an absurd possibility on p. IIS above.
4 At this point the main line of the argument is resumed (above, p. 1 II n. 6).
5 Except on p. 99 above, Aristotle in c. 6 confined the mimesis of intellect to
the speeches containing demonstrative arguments and general maxims. Here he includes

POETICS

to proceed from just these same main heads, when one needs to produce
an effect of pity or fear, likelihood or importance. There is some difference,
though; in the action these should be obvious without one's being told,
whereas the other effects should be produced in words by the person
using them and should result from his words, as the speaker would be
quite unnecessary if the desired result were obvious without his saying
anything.

SECTION D. WITH RESPECT TO VERBAL EXPRESSION
I.

Exclusion of subjects that fall under delivery

So far as verbal expression goes, one branch of inquiry is that into the
forms of speech. Knowledge of this really falls under the study of delivery
and is the province of the expert in that subject. I mean such questions as
'What is a command, a wish, a statement, a threat, a question, an answer ?'
and so on. A poet's knowledge or ignorance in this sphere does not leave
him open to any critical censure worth bothering about. For anyone
would think pretty trivial the fault censured by Protagoras, when he says:
'Homer thinks he is beginning with a prayer and in fact uses a command,
when he says, "Sing of the wrath, goddess", since to tell somebody to
do something or not is a command.' So let us leave that alone, since it
belongs to another field and not to poetry.
2.

The grammatical basis of the discussion

Verbal expression as a whole has the following parts: element, syllable,
linking word, articulatory word, noun, verb, termination, statement.
An element is an indivisible sound, not any sound, but that capable of
producing intelligible utterance; for some animals produce indivisible
sounds, which I do not, however, call elements. This class has three subdivisions, sounded, half-sounded, and soundless. I A sounded element
is that which has an audible sound without any contact occurring. A
half-sounded element is one that produces an audible sound when contact
the use that the characters make of persuasive language more widely defined. The
negatives 'disproof' and 'unimportant' and the varieties of emotions mentioned show
that in this sentence he is speaking of the effect the characters in a play have on each
other. The next sentence seems a rather casual addition, pointing out that the poet in
composing his plot and aiming to produC(' a certain effect on his audience draws on the
same sources of argument as he makes his characters use.
I In modern tenninology: vowels, fricatives, and stops.

20

lIS

ARISTOTLE

does occur: such are sand r. A soundless element is one where contact
occurs without the element itself having any audible sound, though it is
audible when combined with elements that have audible sound: such are
g and d. The elements in these three classes can be further classified,
according to the shape of the mouth, the place of contact, rough or smooth
breathing, length or shortness of quantity, and accent, acute, grave, or
intermediate. One can investigate the subject further in works on metric.
A syllable is a composite non-significant sound made up of a voiceless
element and one with voice: gr, for example, is a syllable by itself without
a, and also if a is added to make gra. I But the investigation of this too is a
matter of metric.
1457'
A linking word is (a) a non-significant sound which neither prevents
nor produces the formation from a number of sounds of one significant
utterance; it ought not to stand alone at the beginning of a statement:
examples are men, toi, de, de [the linking particles]; (b) a non-significant
sound that naturally produces from a plurality of sounds that nevertheless
signify one thing a single significant utterance: examples are amphi, peri,
and the rest [of the prepositionsJ.2
An articulatory word (arthron) is a non-significant sound that indicates
the beginning or end or dividing point of a statement; it is naturally
put at either end (?) of a statement or in the middle. 3
A noun is a composite significant sound with no temporality, and made
up of parts not in themselves significant. For in compound words we
do not take the parts to be significant in themselves; in Theodorus, for
example, the doron has no significance.
A verb is a composite significant sound with temporality, and, like a
noun, is made up of parts not in themselves significant; by 'with temporality' I mean that, while 'man' and 'white' do not signify when, 'walks'
and 'walked' do signify present and past time respectively.
Termination is the part of a noun or verb that signifies case and number
and also the part concerned with delivery, for example, question and
command: 'Did he walk?' and 'Walk' show terminations of the verb under
the sections of this class.
A statement is a composite significant sound whose separate parts are
themselves significant; I give this definition because not every statement
is made up of nouns and verbs-the definition of man, for instance;4

cr. eR N.S.20, 1970, 179.
Text very uncertain: we follow Bywater's conjectures and transpositions.
3 Aristotle probably means co-ordinating and subordinating conjunctions-he does not
mean the article, though the same term is used for this in later grammatical terminology.
4 In statements like 'Man is a featherless biped' Greek can omit the copula; the
definition of 'statement' corrects onc given by Plato.
I

2

POETICS

one can, that is, have a statement with no verb, but it will always have a
significant part.! A statement is one statement in two senses: (a) as signifying one thing, (b) by being composed of a plurality of statements: the
Iliad, for example, is one as being composite, and the definition of man as
signifying one thing.

3. Different ways of classifying nouns2
The species of nouns are: (a) simple: by this I mean 'not composed of
significant parts', for example, 'earth'; (b) double: this has two varieties:
(i) composed of a significant element and a non-significant element [e.g.
prepositional compounds]; one must qualify this by saying that they are
not significant and non-significant in the word;3 (ii) composed of significant elements; (c) possible species are also triple, quadruple, and indeed
multiple, like most aggrandized words,4 'Hermocaicoxanthus' . . .
Nouns may also be divided into standard terms, dialect terms,
metaphorical terms, decorative terms,S neologisms, lengthened words,
shortened words, altered words.
By 'standard term' I mean that used by any society.
By 'dialect term' I mean one used by another people. The same word
can obviously be both a standard term and a dialect term, though not in
the same society: sigunon is a standard term in Cyprus, a dialect term in
Athens.
A 'metaphorical term' involves the transferred use of a term that
properly belongs to something else; the transference can be from genus
to species, from species to genus, from species to species, or analogical.
I The manuscripts add the lunatic and irrelevant clause 'for example, "Qeon" in
"Cleon is walking".'
2 To avoid repetition, Aristode's discussion of poetical style covers more than tragedy,
dealing as well with choral lyric and with epic. The compound words discussed in the
first classification are particularly suitable to choral lyric, while many of the decorative
elements in the second classification are epic rather than tragic.
3 Above, p. II 8. The qualification must also be extended to variety (ii).
4 The Arabic translation has 'Massiliote words', for which editors have a strange
affection, though they admit that the 'most' then becomes nonsensical; it also suggests
that our text is defective after 'Hermocaicoxanthus'.
5 Unlike the other terms in the list, this is not defined and discussed below. A
papyrus fragment of a work perhaps written by Theophrastus seems to deal with
ornamental epithets ('blazing steel', 'bright gold') after a discussion of metaphor akin
to ours. Others have thought of synonymous terms and have tried to provide the treatment of 'decorative terms' from fr. 3: 'Aristode says in his Poetics that things are
synonymous if they have more than one name but the same definition, that is, things
that have several names, for example, topion and himation and pharos (all words for
"cloak").'

21

1457b

120

ARISTOTLE

By 'from genus to species' I mean, for example, 'Here my ship is still"I
as lying at anchor is a species of being still. By 'from species to genus',
'Odysseus conferred ten thousand benefits',2 as 'ten thousand' is a specific
example of plurality and he uses this instead of 'many'. By 'species to
species', 'drawing the life with the bronze' and 'cutting off [the water]
with the unwearying bronze';3 in these examples 'drawing' is used for
'cutting off' and 'cutting off' for 'drawing', and both are species of the
genus 'removing'. By 'analogical' I mean where the second term is related
to the first as the fourth is to the third; for then the poet will use the
fourth to mean the second and vice versa. And sometimes they add the
term relative to the one replaced: I mean, for example, the cup is related
to Dionysus as the shield is to Ares; so the poet will call the cup 'Dionysus'
shield' and the shield 'Ares' CUp';4 again old age is to life what evenjng
is to day, and so he will call evening 'the old age of the day' or use
Empedocles' phrase,s and call old age 'the evening of life' or 'the sunset of
life'.6 Sometimes one of the four related terms has no word to express it,
but it can be expressed through a comparison; for example, scattering
seed is called 'sowing', but there is no term for the scattering of light by
the sun; but as this is related to the sun as sowing is to the scatterer of
seed, we have the expression 'sowing the god-created fIame'.7 There is
yet another form of analogical metaphor: this is the use of the transferred
term coupled with the denial of one of its implications, for example,
calling the shield 'the wineless cup' instead of 'Ares' cup'.
Neologisms are terms not in use at all, but invented by the poet himself;
some are thought to be of this kind, for example, ernuges for 'horns' and
areter for 'priest'.8
14S8a
A 'lengthened word' is one using a longer vowel than is usual, or an
extra syllable: an example of the former is poleos for polcos, and of the
second PeleiadiO for Peleidou. 9
A 'shortened word' is one where something is removed from it, for
example, kr' for krithC, do for doma, and ops for opsis •..
Homer, Odyssey 1. 18S.
Homer, Iliad 2.272.
3 Both examples are assigned to Empedocles (frr. 138, 143); the reference in the
second is to a bronze bucket.
4 Timotheus, PMG 797; 'Dionysus' shield' may well be Aristode's own invention.
S The reference to Empedocles may be misplaced or corrupt; it seems likely that he is
responsible for one of the metaphors in this group.
6 Plato, Laws 770 a.
7 The phrase might come from choral lyric or from a tragic chorus.
8 The latter is used three times by Homer.
9 The terms in this and the following two sections are epic. To explain them nowadays
we invoke comparative philology, but Aristode thinks of poetic licence.
I

2

POETICS

121

An 'altered word' is one where part of the ordinary term is left, and
something made up is added, like dexiteron for dexion •••1

4. Excellence in poetic style
[In poetry] verbal expression is good if it is clear without being mean. z
The clearest is of course that made up of standard words, but it is mean:
an example is the poetry of Oeophon and Sthenelus. The style that uses
strange expressions is solemn and out of the ordinary; by 'strange
expressions' 1 mean dialect terms, metaphor, lengthening, and everything
over and above standard words. But if anyone made an entire poem like
this, it would be either a riddle or gibberish, a riddle if it were entirely
metaphorical, gibberish if all composed of dialect terms. For it is the
nature of a riddle that one states facts by linking impossibilities together
(of course, one cannot do this by putting the actual words for things
together, but one can if one uses metaphor), for example 'I saw a man
welding bronze on a man with fire'3 and so on. And a poem wholly made
up of dialect terms is gibberish. So there ought to be a sort of admixture
of these, as the one element will prevent the style from being ordinary
and mean, that is, dialect, metaphor, decorative terms, and the other
species 1 mentioned, while standard terms will make it clear.
Q!Jite a large contribution to a style both clear and out of the ordinary
is made by lengthenings, shortenings, and alterations of words. For
because it is other than standard, being unusual, it will produce an effect
of being out of the ordinary; at the same time, it will be clear because of its
element of the usual. So there is something incorrect in the censure of
those who blame this sort of style and mock at Homer, in the way the
elder Euclides did, when he said it was easy to be a poet if one were
allowed to lengthen things as much as one liked ...4 Of course it is
absurd to be found obviously using this sort of thing; but all the kinds
demand a due measure, as one could also use metaphors and dialect
words and so on in an inappropriate and deliberately ridiculous way and
produce the same result. If one wants to see how important it is to use
them suitably one should take epic verses and put ordinary words into
them. In all cases, dialect, metaphor, and so on, if one substituted the
I Mter this the manuscripts add a section on the division of nouns into masculine,
feminine, and neuter. This is untrue, fatuous, and irrelevant; it is impossible to believe
that it is the work of the same man who produced the penetrating linguistic analysis
of pp. 117 ff. above, and it is accordingly omitted here.
Z Contrast the definition of excellence in prose style, below, p. 137.
3 Cf. below, p. 139 .
.. Aristode here quotes two hexameters in which Euclides parodied Homer's occasional irrational lengthening of short syllables.

22

1458b

122

ARISTOTLE

standard word, one would easily see the truth of what I am saying. For
example, Aeschylus and Euripides produced the same iambic line,1 with
the change of a single word, as Euripides put a dialect term for the standard word, and so produced a beautiful line instead of an unimpressive
one; for Aeschylus in his Philoetetes said 'The canker that eats the flesh
of my foot', while Euripides substituted thoiniitai for [the standard verb]
esthiei. Again, take the line 'being little (oligos) and no worth (outidanos)
and hideous (aeikes)' and substitute the standard words mikros, asthenikos,
aeides;2 and for 'putting down a poor (aeikelion) chair and little (oligen)
table'3 put mochtheron (poor) and mikran (little);4 and for etones booosin s
(,the shores shout') put ei"ones krazousin. 6
Ariphrades mocked the tragedians as well for using expressions that
1459" nobody would use in conversation ... 7 Wrongly, for all such expressions,
because not standard, produce a stylistic effect of being out of the ordinary;
but Ariphrades did not know that.
It is extremely important to use in the proper place each of the kinds
I have mentioned,s but by far the most important is to be good at metaphor. For this is the only one that cannot be learnt from anyone else,9
and it is a sign of natural genius, as to be good at metaphor is to perceive
resemblances. Of nouns, compounds best suit dithyrambs, dialect words
hexameter verse, and metaphors iambic verse. ID Though in hexameters
all the kinds are useful, in iambics, because they most closely represent
actual speech, the most suitable are those that one would also use in prose
speeches, that is, standard words, metaphors, and decorative termsY
So much for tragedy and mimesis via action.
Aeschylus, fro 253; Euripides, fr. 792.
Homer, Odyssey 9. 515. oligos in the sense of 'small' is here regarded as a dialect
term; in Attic it means 'few'. outidanos does not belong to prose at all, while asthenikos
is decidedly prosaic as most of the words terminating in -ikos were not only of recent
formation, but associated with philosophical and scientific discourse. aeides also seems
to be used only by philosophers and medical writers.
3 Homer, Odyssey 20. 259.
4 mochtheros, in the sense of'distressed' or 'distressful' or as a term of moral condemnation, does belong to high poetry; but its use of things like chairs, to signify that they are
'in a bad way', is confined to Attic colloquial speech.
5 Homer, Iliad 17. 265.
6 krazein of human bawling is no more or less prosaic than boiin, with which indeed
it is sometimes linked as a synonym by the orators; but boijosin is a 'lengthened' word, for
which Attic would use boiisin.
7 Aristotle adds examples: archaic forms of pronouns, anastrophe of prepositions
(i.e. placing them after their nouns).
8 The manuscripts add 'and (? both) compound words and dialect terms'. This seems
to be a foolish interpolation from the context immediately below.
9 Cf. below, p. 138.
10 The metre of tragic dialogue.
11 Cf. above, p. 119; below, pp. 136 If.
I

2

POETICS
CHAPTER

123

IV

EPIC
SECTION A. THE SIMILARITIES BETWEEN EPIC AND TRAGEDY
I.

The need for unity

Now for the narrative art that uses verse as its medium of mimeSIS. 23
Clearly one should compose the plots here to be dramatic, just as in the
case of tragedies, that is, about one whole or complete action with a
beginning, middle parts, I and end, so that it produces its proper pleasure
like a single whole living creature. Its plots should not be like histories;
for in histories it is necessary to give a report of a single period, not of a
unified action, that is, one must say whatever was the case in that period
about one man or more; and each of these things may have a quite casual
interrelation. For just as, if one thinks of the same time, we have the
battle of Salamis and the battle of Himera against the Carthaginians not
directed to achieve any identical purpose, so in consecutive times one
thing sometimes happens after another without any common purpose
being achieved by them. Most epic poets do make plots like histories.
So in this respect too Homer is marvellous in the way already described,
in that he did not undertake to make a whole poem of the war either,2
even though it had a beginning and an end. For the plot would have been
too large and not easy to see as a whole, or if it had been kept to a moderate
length it would have been tangled because of the variety of events. As
it is he takes one part and uses many others as episodes, for example, the
catalogue of the ships and the other episodes with which he breaks the
uniformity of his poem. But the rest make a poem about one man or one
period of time,3 like the poet of the Cypria or the Little Iliad. That is why 1459b
the Iliad and Odyssey have matter only for one tragedy or only for two,4
whereas there is matter for many in the Cypria, and in the Little Iliad for
I The plural, as distinct from the 'middle' of tragedy (above, p. 100), allows for
epic's greater extension.
2 In the Iliad; there seems to be a reference back to the discussion of the unity of the
Odyssey on pp. 101 f. 'Whole' here as there implies 'unified'.
3 The manuscripts add 'that is (? and) about one action with many parts'; this is
very like the description of the Iliad and the Odyssey themselves that Aristotle gives
below, p. 132. Moreover, if we believe that we know anything at all about the poems of
the epic cycle, it is hard to credit that Aristotle ever allowed that their ramshackle
structures dealt with 'one action', however polymerous.
4 The reference is to the principal action of the poems, not to the episodes, like that
ofBellerophon, which provided material for more tragedies; for the neglect of Aeschylus,
cf. above, p. 1I6 n. 3.

124

ARISTOTLE

more than eight, for example, The Adjudgement of the Arms, Philoctetes,
Neoptolemus, Eurypylus, Odysseus as a Beggar, The Lacolliall Women, The
Sack of Troy, The Departure, plus the Sinon and the Trojan Women.!
2.

24

The species of epic

Moreover, epic must have the same species as tragedy, that is, must be
simplez or complex, a story of character or one of pathos. [And the
elements are the same except for music and spectacle.] And it needs
peripeteiai and recognitions and pathe. [Moreover its mimesis of intellect and its verbal expression should be good.] All of these Homer
was the first to use and his use of them is exemplary. For in the case of
each of the poems, the composition of the Iliad is simple and full of
pathos, that of the Odyssey complex, as there are recognitions throughout,
and full of character. [And in addition he is pre-eminent in his verbal
expression and mimesis of intellect.]3

SECTION B. THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN EPIC
AND TRAGEDY

Epic differs from tragedy in the length of its plot and in its metre.
I.

Length

The above mentioned limit oflength4 is an adequate guide: that is, one
should be able to get a synoptic view of the beginning and the end. This
will be the case if the poems are shorter than those of the ancients,S and
about as long as the number of tragedies offered at one sitting.
Epic has a peculiar characteristic in that its size can be considerably
Probably not everything in this list is due to Aristotle.
Cf. above, p. II5. 'Simple' here corresponds to what should probably be 'spectacle'
there.
3 F. Soimsen, CQ 29, 1935, 195, was probably correct in arguing that a series of
remarks about the qualitative parts (here enclosed in double brackets) has been superimposed on a straightforward discussion of the species of epic. Whether he is right
in believing that these inane interruptions are later additions by Aristotle himself is
another matter.
4 Above, p. 101.
S The phrase delicately veils the name of Homer, the only one of the older epic poets
to produce very long compositions. The limit suggested by Aristotle is virtually that
observed by Apollonius Rhodius; Virgil decided that he needed more room to deploy a
heroic theme.
I

2

POETICS

further extended; for though in tragedy it is impossible to represent
many parts as at the moment of their occurrence, since one can only
represent the part on the stage and involving the actors, in epic, because
it is narrative, one can tell of many things as at the moment of their
accompli~hment, and these if they are relevant make the poem more
impressive. So it has this advantage in the direction of grandeur
and variety for the hearer and in being constructed with dissimilar
episodes. For it is similarity and the satiety it soon produces that make
tragedies fail.
2.

Metre

The heroic verse was found suitable from experience. For if anyone were
to make a narrative mimesis in any other metre or in many metres, it would
be obviously unsuitable, as the heroic metre is the steadiest and most
weighty of all (which is why it is most ready to admit dialect terms and
metaphors); for the narrative mimesis has itself a sort of abundance
in comparison with the others. The iambic trimeter and trochaic tetrameter are metres of movement, one of the dance, the other of action. It 1460•
would be even stranger if one mixed them like Chaeremon. That is why
no one has composed a long composition except in heroic verse; instead,
nature herself teaches people to choose the metre appropriate to the composition in the way I said.

SECTION C. THE SPECIAL MERITS OF HOMER

Homer especially deserves praise as the only epic poet to realize what the
epic poet should do in his own person, that is, say as little as possible,
since it is not in virtue of speaking in his own person that he is a maker of
mimesis. Other pocts are personally engaged throughout, and only rarely
use mimesis; but Homer after a brief preface at once brings on a man or
woman or other characterized person, none of them characterless, but all
full of character.'
Though one ought of course to aim at surprise in tragedy too, epic is
more tolerant of the prime source of surprise, the irrational, because one is
not looking at the person doing the action. For the account of the pursuit
of Hector would seem ludicrous on the stage, with the Greeks standing
I The doctrine in this section seems at variance with the view that plain narrative is a
variety of mimesis (above, p. 93). The same sort of exaggeration of the small part played
in Homer by direct narration seems to occur in Plato, Republic 393 a (above, p. 61).

I26

ARISTOTLE

still and not pursuing him, and Achilles refusing their help;1 but in epic
one does not notice it. And surprise gives pleasure, as we can see from the
fact that we all make additions when telling a story, and take it that we are
giving pleasure. Now it was Homer who taught other poets the proper
way to tell lies, that is, by using paralogism. For people think that if,
whenever one thing is true or happens, another thing is true or happens,
then if the second is true, the first is true or happens; but this is not so.
That is why, if the first is false, but if it were true something else must be
true or happen, one should add the second; for because we know that the
second is true, our soul falsely infers that the first is also true. The thing
in the Bath scene is an example of this. Z
One ought to prefer likely impossibilities to unconvincing possibilities
and not compose one's argument of irrational parts. Preferably there
should be no irrationality at all, and if there is it should be outside the
plot; the Oedipus, for example, has this sort of irrationality in his not
knowing how Laius died. 3 It should not be inside the plot like the messengers from the Pythian games in the Electra4 or the man who went
speechless from Tegea to Mysia in the Mysians. 5 So it is absurd to say
that otherwise the plot would have been ruined, as one should not compose them to be like this in the first place. If one does put in an irrationality and it is apparent that it could be dealt with more rationally, it is
absurd as well. For it is clear that even the irrationalities in the Odyssey
1460b about his being put ashore 011 Ithaca would have been intolerable if
produced by a bad poet;6 but as it is Homer completely disguises the
flavour of absurdity by his other excellences. It is in the parts that involve
no action and no mimesis of character or intellect that one should be most
elaborate in verbal expression; when character and intellect are being
represented too brilliant a style often conceals them.
I Homer, Iliad 22. 131 If.
• The reference is to Homer, Odyssey 19. 220 If. where Pene10pe infers from
Odysseus' account of the clothes he wore in Crete that he had met Odysseus there. The
instance is not particularly to the point, as it involves a false inference made by one
character about another, whereas the context is talking about how the poet misleads his
hearers.
3 It may be remarked that Sophocles seems to have been aware of this irrationality,
and to have tried to palliate it by attributing to the royal house of Thebes and to the
chorus an instinctive distaste for the public discussion of unpleasant subjects (91 f.
Creon, 637 f. Jocasta, 678 f., 685 f. the chorus).
4 Sophocles, Electra 680 If. The irrationality may lie in the anachronism.
S Of Aeschylus or Sophocles.
6 Homer, Odyssey 13. II3 If.

POETICS

IZ7

SECTION D. CRITICISMS OF HOMER AND HOW TO ANSWER
THEMI
I.

The bases of the answers

The next subject is questions about what is said and the answers to them.
How many species do they fall under and what are the species? If we
look at the matter as follows the answer will be clear.
(a) Since the poet produces mimeseis, just like a painter or other visual
artist, the object of his mimesis must always be one of three things, that
is, what was or is, what is commonly said and thought to be the case, and
what should be the case.
(b) The narration of these involves verbal expression, including the
use of dialect terms and metaphor and many abnormal elements of expression, as these are licences we allow to poets.
(c) Further, correctness in poetry is not the same thing as correctness
in morals,2 nor yet is it the same as correctness in any other art. Faults
that are relevant to the art of poetry itself are of two kinds, one involving
its essential nature, and the other incidental. If the poet is incapable of
representing what he set out to represent, this is an error involving the
essential nature of poetry. If the error arises through the poet's setting
out to represent something incorrectly, for example, representing a horse
with both its right legs forward,3 and this is the reason why we find
in the poem either a mistake with reference to any particular art (for
example, medicine or some other art) or, more generally, any other impossibility, this does not involve the essential nature of poetry.4
So one should use these principles in examining and answering the
questions raised.
2.

(a)

The twelve sorts of answer

ANSWERS DERIVED FROM BASIS

(c)

Let us take first of all the errors that involve the art of poetry itself:
1. If the poem contains[, for instance,] an impossibility,s that is a
fault; but it is all right if the poem thereby achieves what it aims at (what
I This discussion is extremely difficult and compressed, presumably because it is
an epitome of the four books that Aristotle wrote on Homeric Problems.
2 This curt phrase is a very important part of Aristotle's answer to Plato.
3 Photography has shown that horses do sometimes employ this gait.
4 The English reader may recall the justified censure of Milton's botany in Lycidas.
5 It is important to realize that though Aristotle takes an impossibility as an example,
he could equally well have chosen something irrational, morally damaging, or selfcontradictory (below, p. 131).

128

ARISTOTLE

it aims at I have already discussed), that is, if in this way the surprise
produced either by that particular passage or by another is more striking.
An example is the pursuit of Hector. However, if it was possible for the
aim to be attained either more or no less without any error in the art
[essentially] concerned, it is not all right; for, if possible, there should be
no error at all.
2. Secondarily, one should consider whether the error involves the
essential nature of poetry or something incidental, as it is a lesser fault
not to know that a hind has no antlers than to paint it in a way that is not
adequate to mimesis.

(b)

ANSWERS DERIVED FROM BASIS

(a)'

3. In answer to the charge of not being true, one can say, 'But perhaps
it is as it should be': Sophocles, for example, said that he represented
people as they should be, and Euripides as they are; this is the answer.
4. If it is neither true nor as it should be, one can reply, 'But it is what
people say'. An example of this is the treatment of the gods: for this,
perhaps, is neither a better thing to say nor a true one, but instead the
'461" facts are perhaps as Xenophanes saw them;2 but anyhow that is what
people say.
5. Again, if the reply that it is better is not open, the answer can be,
'It used to be so'; an example here is the remark about weapons, 'Their
spears stood upright on their butt-ends';3 that was the custom then, as it
still is among the Illyrians.
6. Then there is the question whether someone's statement or action
is good or-not. Here one should not look just at what is said or done in
considering whether it is good or bad, but should also take into account
the person who says or does it, asking to whom he said or did it, when,
with what, and for what motive. Was it, for instance, to produce a greater
good or avert a greater evil?

(c)

ANSWERS DERIVED FROM BASIS

(b)4

Some objections should be answered by considering the expressions
used:
I The first three answers here are various ways of dealing with the charge that what
is said is not true, the fourth with the charge that what is said is not as it should be,
i.e. is morally damaging.
3 Above, p. 4.
3 Homer, Iliad 10. '52.
4 The charges answered are, as one would expect, of very diverse kinds; answer (7),
for instance, copes first with a supposed irrationality, then with a supposed selfcontradiction ('How could Dolon run fast if he was deformed ?'), then with something
supposed morally damaging.

POETICS

129

7. A dialect word may be involved: for example, in 'First it attacked
the mules',' it may be that oureas means 'sentinels', not 'mules'; and in
the case of Dolon 'whose form (eidos) was not good',Z he means he had an
ugly face, not a distorted body, since the Cretaris use eueides to mean
'having a handsome face'; again, in 'make the mixture zoroteron', this
word means, not 'stronger' with the implication that they were winebibbers, but 'faster'.3
8. Some expressions are metaphorical. For example, in 'The rest of
gods and men slept the night 10ng',4 where he says at the same time
'when he looked toward the plain of Troy, he marvelled at the din of
flutes and pipes',5 'all' is used metaphorically for 'many', as totality is a
species of plurality. Similarly 'The pole star alone has no contact with the
Ocean'6 is also metaphorical; for 'alone' is put for 'best known'.
9. The answer may be to change the accents and breathing: such a
solution was given by Hippias of Thasos in suggesting the imperatival
infinitive did6men for didomen in 'and we grant him the achievement of
glory',7 and the negative ou for the partitive hou in 'part of it is rotted by
the rain'.8
10. Some may be answered by a change of punctuation, for example,
Empedocles' 'at once things became mortal which had been used to be
immortal, and things unmixed formerly mixed'.9
II. Another reply is that the expression is ambiguous, for example, in
'more of the night was past than two thirds; the third was left';1O here
pleo, 'more', is ambiguous [and may mean 'full'].
12. Some things are a matter of usage. We call wine and water 'wine',
and by analogy with this Homer says 'greaves of new.,forged tin'.lI And
we call iron-workers 'bronze-smiths', and on the.analogy of this Ganymede is said to pour wine for Zeus, IZ though gods do not drink wine; this
could also be explained as an analogical metaphor.
I Homer, Iliad I. 50.
• Ibid. 10. 316.
3 Ibid. 9. 202.
4 Ibid. 10. I f., 2. I f.
5 Ibid. 10. 11-13.
6 Ibid. 18. 489, Odyssey 5. 275; Aristotle gives tlris and some otlrer of tlre quotations
in this section in a much abbreviated form.
7 Homer, Iliad 21.297 and perhaps in Aristotle's text of Iliad 2. IS.
8 Ibid. 23. 328.
9 Fr. 35. 14 f. Aristotle means tlrat one should take 'formerly' witlr 'unmixed' instead
of witlr 'mixed'.
la Homer, Iliad 10. 251 ff.
Ibid. 21. 592; 'tin' is used for 'bronze', an alloy containing it.
a Ibid. 20. 234.
l[

8143591

K

13 0

ARISTOTLE

3. Summary
In fact, whenever a word is thought to signify something involving a
contradiction, we ought to consider how many meanings the word
might have in the phrase in question; for example, in 'by it the bronze
spear was stayed',. in how many senses is it possible to take 'was stayed
by it', and is it by taking it in this sense or in that sense that one would be
146Ib going most contrary to the practice described by Glaucon, when he said
that some people make irrational assumptions about a thing and, having
passed this vote of censure all by themselves, make an inference from it
and blame the poet as if he had said what they think he did, if what he
says contradicts what they imagine. This has happened in the argument
about Icarius. They think he was a Spartan and therefore say it is absurd
that Telemachus did not meet him when he went to Sparta. But the
facts may be as stated by the Cephallenians; they say that Odysseus took
his wife from among them and that his father-in-law was Icadius, not
Icarius; so probably the criticism rests on a mistake.
Generally speaking, one should answer a charge that a thing is impossible by a reference to the demands of poetry (I), or to the fact that
it is better so (3) or commonly thought to be so (4). By 'the demands of
poetry' I mean that a convincing impossibility is preferable to something
unconvincing, however possible; again it is perhaps impossible for people
to be as beautiful as Zeuxis painted them, but it is better so, as the ideal
should surpass reality.
A charge of irrationality should be dealt with by reference to what is
commonly said (4). That is one answer. Another is that on some occasions
it is not irrational, as it is likely that things happen even contrary to
likelihood. 2
A charge of self-contradiction one should consider on the same basis
as refutations in argument, asking, that is, whether it is itself the same,
and related to the same thing, and used in the same sense, so that it is the
poet himself who is contradicting either what he himself says or what a
sensible man assumes.
A charge of irrationality or of representing wickedness is justified if
there is no necessity for the irrationality or moral wickedness and no
use is made of it. An example of the former is Euripides' treatment of
Aegeus [in the Medea], of the latter his treatment of Menelaus in the
Orestes.J
I Homer, Iliad 20. 272; the problem is how the layer of gold stopped the spear when
it passed the layers of bronze.
2 Above, p. II6. The figures in round brackets in this and the preceding paragraph
refer to the relevant 'answers'.
3 Above, p. IIO.

POETICS

131

Well then, people produce censures under five heads, claiming that
things are impossible, irrational, morally dangerous, self-contradictory,
or contrary to technical correctness. I The answers to them are on the
basis of the points enumerated: they are twelve in number.
SECTION E. EPIC AND TRAGEDY

Which is better, the epic or the tragic mimesis? This is a question one 26
might raise.
I.

The statement of the opponents of tragedy

Now if whichever is less vulgar is superior, and the less vulgar in any
area is what is directed towards a superior audience, it is quite obvious
that the one prepared to represent just anything is vulgar. For on the
assumption that the audience will not grasp what is meant unless the
performer underlines it, they go in for a variety of movements, like bad
flute-players rolling about if they have to represent a discus, or dragging
the chorus-leader up and down when they play Scylla. Now this is what
tragedy is like, resembling in this the later actors, as their predecessors
thought of them. For Mynniscus called Callipides an ape, meaning that
he went too far, and people thought the same about Pindarus; their 1462'
relation to their own predecessors is the same as that of tragedy as a whole
to epic. Epic, they say, is directed to a cultivated audience which does
not need gesture, tragedy to a low-class one; so if it is vulgar, it must
obviously be worse.
2.

The arguments for tragedy

We may say first and foremost that this charge is directed against the art
of the performer, not that of the poet, since one can be over-elaborate
and over-emphatic in reciting epic as well, like Sosistratus, and in a
singing contest, like Mnasitheus of Opus. Moreover not all movement is
disreputable, given that not all dancing is disreputable either, but only
the movement of low-class people; this censure was made against Callipi des and others, on the ground that they represent women of no repute.
Again, tragedy produces its effect even without movement, just as epic
I i.e. involving ignorance of, for instance, botany or zoology; cf. above, p. 127. An
olfence against 'the art of poetry itself' would be an indefensible example of one of the
other four.
2 The position here stated is largely that formulated by Plato: see the criticism
of mimesis in the Republic (above, pp. 61 If.).

132

1462b

ARISTOTLE

does; for a reading I makes its nature quite clear. So ifit is superior in all
other respects, this charge will not necessarily lie. 2
Again, tragedy has everything that epic has (it can even use its metre),
and moreover has a considerable addition in the music and the spectacle,
which produce pleasure in a most vividly perceptible way.
Moreover, it has vividness when read as well as when performed.
Again, it takes less space to attain the end of its mimesis; this is an advantage because what comes thick and fast gives more pleasure than something diluted by a large admixture of time-think, for instance, of the
effect if someone put Sophocles' Oedipus into as many lines as the Iliad.
Again, the mimesis of the epic poets is less unified, as we can see from the
fact that any epic mimesis provides matter for several tragedies. The
result of this is that if they do make a single plot, it either appears curtailed, when it is only briefly indicated, or follows the lead of its lengthy
metre and becomes dilute; I mean here the poem made up of several
actions, in the way in which the Iliad has many such parts and also the
Odyssey, and these parts have extension in themselves (and yet these two
poems are as admirably composed as can be and are, so far as possible,
the mimesis of a single action).
If tragedy is superior in all these respects and also in artistic effectiveness (for these arts should produce not just any pleasure, but the one
we have discussed),3 it would obviously be superior to epic as it is more
successful in attaining what it aims at.
So much for tragedy and epic, their nature, the number and differences
of their qualitative elements and quantitative parts, the reasons for success
and failure in them, and criticisms of them and how to answer them.
B. CATHARSIS
(Politics 134Ib32 If.)

In the absence of better evidence, this passage must be taken as determinant of
the meaning of catharsis in the Poetics as well; and in speaking of pity and fear
Aristotle certainly seems to have tragedy in mind rather than just music.
Catharsis therefore operates by rousing to a high pitch an emotion to which
people are, either morbidly or to some degree, prone; the intensification of
emotion produces a relief from it. Nevertheless, music is not quite on all fours
with tragedy: its place in therapeutic practice was established; more important,
though the Greeks regarded music as more 'programmatic' than we do, it is
Cf. below, p. 143.
The three arguments in this paragraph are defensive; the rest state positive advantages of tragedy.
3 Cf. above, pp. 86 f. The catharsis of pity and fear could hardly stand at the point
where it does in the definition of tragedy if Aristotle thought it characteristic of epic too.