Book 3
Delivery, Style, and Arrangement

n After a few remarks on delivery, chapters 1–12 contain a discussion
of lexis, chapters 13–19 of taxis. Lexis (Latin elocutio) refers to the “way of
saying something” in contrast to logos, “what is said,” and is usually translated “style.” In some passages Aristotle uses lexis in a broad sense of how
thought is expressed in words, sentences, and a speech as a whole, but
often he uses the term in the more restricted sense of “word choice, diction” (hence, English lexical). Translation needs to vary with context, and
often it has seemed best to retain the Greek term and let the meaning
emerge from the context. Taxis (Latin dispositio) means “arrangement” and
refers to the “ordering” of the conventional parts of an oration, especially
as seen in judicial speeches.
To judge from the list of Aristotle’s works given by Diogenes Laertius
(5.24), Book 3 was originally a separate work, and much of it was probably
written during Aristotle’s early teaching of rhetoric in Plato’s Academy in the
350s B.C.E. Chapters 1–9 contain no references to events later than that
time. Chapters 10 and 11 cite Isocrates’ Philippus of 346 and have been
written or revised after that date, perhaps when Aristotle was teaching
Alexander. The Philippus, Isocrates’ address to his father, Philip of Macedon,
urging him to take leadership of the Greeks against Persia, would have been
of special interest to the young man. Aristotle had a less mature grasp of the
material on style than of the logical and ethical features of rhetoric discussed
in Books 1 and 2. Chapters 5, 6, 8, and 9 are particularly unsatisfactory.
For a chapter-by-chapter analysis of Book 3, go to http://archelogos.com/
xml/aristotleindex.htm.

193

194

On Rhetoric

Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 1: Summary of Books 1–2; Some Remarks on Hypokrisis,
or Delivery; the Origins of Artistic Prose
n The first two sections of chapter 1 are a transition connecting what follows
with Book 2, which itself ended with a short transition section. This repetition is awkward and probably resulted from joining two separate works
together: the work in two books on dianoia, “thought,” or “invention,” and
a work on lexis and taxis. Perhaps Aristotle made this connection himself at
a late stage in his revision of the whole, in which case the transition at the
end of Book 2 indicated that further discussion of rhetoric continued on
another papyrus scroll, which then began with a notice that it was to be
linked with the work on invention. Perhaps, however, section 1 and 2 were
added by Tyrannio or Andronicus when the works of Aristotle were edited
and published in the first century B.C.E.; see Appendix II.B. A third beginning
is then supplied in section 3, followed by some remarks on delivery, and the
actual discussion of lexis does not begin until section 8.

1. Since there are three matters that need to be treated in discussion
of speech—first, what will be the sources of the pisteis, second concerning the lexis, and third how the parts of the speech ought to be
arranged—an account has been given of the pisteis and their number,
including the fact that they are drawn from three sources and what
sort of things these are and why there are only these [three]. (All
people are persuaded either because as judges they themselves are
affected in some way or because they suppose the speakers have certain qualities or because something has been logically demonstrated.)
An account has also been given of enthymemes and where they are to
be found. (There are on the one hand species [eidB] of enthymemes
and on the other hand there are topics.1) 2. The next subject to discuss
is lexis; for it is not enough to have a supply of things to say but it is
also necessary to say it in the right way, and this contributes much
toward the speech seeming to have a certain quality.
HYPOKRISIS, OR DELIVERY

3. The first thing to be examined was naturally that which came first
by nature, the facts from which a speech has persuasive effect; second
1. The species are the idia of Book 1, chs. 4–14; the topics are the koina of 2.23.

BOOK 3, Chapter 1

195

is how to compose this in language [lexis]; and third is something that
has the greatest force but has not yet been taken in hand, the matter of
the delivery [hypokrisis].2 Even in regard to tragedy and rhapsody,3
delivery was late in coming to be considered; for originally the poets
themselves acted their tragedies.4 Clearly there is something like this
in rhetoric, as in poetics. Some others have given attention to the
latter, among them Glaucon of Teos.5 4. It is a matter of how the voice
should be used in expressing each emotion, sometimes loud and
sometimes soft or intermediate, and how the pitch accents [tonoi]
should be entoned, whether as acute, grave, or circumflex,6 and what
rhythms should be expressed in each case; for [those who study delivery] consider three things, and these are volume, change of pitch
[harmonia], and rhythm. Those [performers who give careful attention to these] are generally the ones who win poetic contests; and just
as actors are more important than poets now in the poetic contests, so
it is in political contests because of the sad state of governments.7
5. An Art concerned with [the delivery of oratory] has not yet been
composed, since even consideration of lexis was late in developing,
and delivery seems a vulgar matter when rightly understood.8 But
since the whole business of rhetoric is with opinion, one should pay
attention to delivery, not because it is right but because it is necessary,
since true justice seeks nothing more in a speech than neither to offend
nor to entertain; for to contend by means of the facts themselves is
2. The prevailing meaning of hypokrisis in Greek is “acting” and the regular word
for an actor is hypokritBs. Aristotle had remarked in 2.8.14–15 on gestures used by
people in affliction, which were probably sometimes acted in court, but his discussion
here relates only to the voice. On the use of gestures in Greek delivery, see Boegehold
1999.
3. The recitation of epic or dithyrambic poetry.
4. Thus there was no need to consider the oral interpretation of a play separately
from the presentation of it by the author. With occasional exceptions, plays were only
performed once, but written copies were available to the reading public.
5. Probably the rhapsodist mentioned in Plato’s Ion 530 and quoted in Poetics
25.1461b1.
6. Accents on Greek words indicate pitch, not stress: an acute accent indicates a
rising tone, a grave accent a falling tone, and a circumflex accent a rising and falling
tone. In addition, Greek words have a rhythmical shape determined by the arrangement of long and short syllables.
7. This point, repeated in the next section, seems to reflect the Platonic view (e.g.,
Gorgias 463a–b) that political oratory under democracy had become a form of flattery
and that it offered entertainment to the mob.
8. Aristotle’s negative attitude toward delivery probably also derives from Plato
(e.g., Republic 3.397a–d); see Fortenbaugh 1986.

1404a

196

On Rhetoric

just, with the result that everything except demonstration is incidental; but, nevertheless, [delivery] has great power, as has been said,
because of the corruption of the audience. 6. The subject of lexis,
however, has some small necessary place in all teaching; for to speak
in one way rather than another does make some difference in regard
to clarity, though not a great difference; but all these things are forms
of outward show and intended to affect the audience. As a result,
nobody teaches geometry this way. 7. Whenever delivery comes to
be considered9 it will function in the same way as acting, and some
have tried to say a little about it, for example, Thrasymachus in his
Emotional Appeals.10 Acting is a matter of natural talent and largely
not reducible to artistic rule, but insofar as it involves how things are
said [lexis], it has an artistic element. As a result, prizes go to those
who are skilled at it, just as they do to orators on the basis of their
delivery; for written speeches [when orally recited] have greater
effect through expression [lexis] than through thought.11
8. The poets were naturally the first to set in motion [study of
verbal expression]; for words are imitations,12 and the voice, the most
mimetic of all our parts, was there to start with. Thus, the verbal arts
were established: rhapsody and acting and the others. 9. Since the
poets, while speaking sweet nothings, seemed to acquire their reputation through their lexis, a poetic style came into existence [in prose
as well], for example, that of Gorgias. Even now, the majority of the
uneducated think such speakers speak most beautifully. This is not
the case, but the [proper] lexis of prose differs from that of poetry. It
is clear from what has happened [in other literary genres that the
direction of development is away from the use of poetic diction]; for
the makers of tragedies do not continue to use the same style, but
just as they changed from tetrameters to the iambic meter because
it was most like ordinary speech, so also they have abandoned the
use of words that are not conversational, with which they had at first

9. As it was by Aristotle’s student Theophrastus; see Fortenbaugh 1985: 269–288.
10. The Eleoi by Thrasymachus of Chalcedon, referred to by Plato in Phaedrus
267c9.
11. There were oratorical contests, with prizes, at festivals in Greece. Written
speeches here probably refers to works by sophists, written and then dramatically
recited. The subject of oral and written style will be discussed further in chapter 12.
12. This is consistent with some of Plato’s Cratylus but not with Aristotle’s own
discussion of words in On Interpretation 1, where they are called “symbols” and
“signs.”

BOOK 3, Chapter 2

197

ornamented their diction as the writers of hexameter poetry still do.13
As a result, it is absurd to imitate those who themselves no longer use
that style of speech. 10. Thus, it is clear that we need not go into detail
about all matters concerned with lexis, only about what applies to the
subject we are discussing. Concerning the other style there is a discussion in the Poetics.14

Chapters 2–12: Lexis, or Style
n Chapters 2– 4 are primarily concerned with lexis in the sense of diction,
or choice of words, chapters 5–12 with the composition of words into
sentences, which came to be known as synthesis, “putting together.”
Aristotle’s discussion applies both to oral speech and to written prose.

Chapter 2: The Aretb, or Virtue, of Good Prose Style;
Word Choice and Metaphors
n This chapter begins with a definition of the virtue or excellence of prose
style and civic oratory as clarity, but with the accompanying requirement
that a writer or speaker seek a mean between ordinary speech and poetic
language as appropriate to the subject. In chapter 5 Aristotle will add a
requirement of grammatical correctness and in subsequent chapters will discuss various forms of ornamentation. These concepts were reformulated by
his student Theophrastus in a treatise, now lost, On Lexis, as “correctness,
clarity, propriety, and ornamentation” and appear in some form in most
subsequent Greek and Roman treatments of rhetoric; see, e.g., Rhetoric for
Herennius 4.17; Cicero, On the Orator 3.37 and Orator 79; Quintilian 8.1–2.

1. Let the matters just discussed be regarded as understood, and let
the virtue of style [lexeDs aretB] be defined as “to be clear” [saphB]
(speech is a kind of sign, so if it does not make clear it will not
perform its function)—and neither flat nor above the dignity of the
subject, but appropriate [prepon]. The poetic style is hardly flat, but
it is not appropriate for speech.
13. The turn to ordinary diction can be seen by comparing dialogue passages of
Euripides, whose diction is often conversational, with those of Aeschylus a generation earlier, where the diction is sometimes bombastic.
14. Poetics 20 –22. Style in poetics is an aspect of imitation, in rhetoric of
persuasion.

1404b

198

On Rhetoric

n Aristotle here applies to word choice the concept of virtue as a mean
between two extremes that is fundamental to his ethical philosophy. His
emphasis on clarity as the most important requirement of good oratorical
style is consistent with his stress on logical proof in the earlier books and his
dislike of the style of sophists. The development of artistic prose in Greek,
though influenced by Gorgianic mannerism derived from poetry, was largely
a matter of the purification of diction and regularization of syntax into
an efficient, elegant tool of expression. The development of artistic prose
in French, and to a lesser extent in English, followed an analogous course
between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries. The great models of Attic
prose are Plato, Lysias, Isocrates, and Demosthenes. On the development of
a theory of style in Greece, see Graff 2005.

2. The use of nouns and verbs in their prevailing [kyrios]15
meaning makes for clarity; other kinds of words, as discussed in the
Poetics [chapters 21–22], make the style ornamented rather than flat.
To deviate [from prevailing usage] makes language seem more elevated; for people feel the same in regard to word usage as they do in
regard to strangers compared with citizens. 3. As a result, one should
make the language unfamiliar;16 for people are admirers of what is far
off, and what is marvelous is sweet. Many [kinds of words] accomplish this in verse and are appropriate there; for what is said [in
poetry] about subjects and characters is more out of the ordinary, but
in prose17 much less so; for the subject matter is less remarkable,
since even in poetry it would be rather inappropriate if a slave used
fine language or if a man were too young for his words or if the
subject were too trivial, but in these cases, too, propriety is a matter
of contraction or expansion [of what is being said]. 4. As a result,
authors should compose without being noticed and should seem to
speak not artificially but naturally.18 (The latter is persuasive, the former
15. Kyrios refers to the prevailing meaning in good current usage and may also be
translated “proper” in the sense found in dictionary definitions; it is not necessarily the
semantic, etymological, or essential meaning of the word. Modern literary critics,
however, have called the concept into serious question, emphasizing the context as the
determinant of meaning; cf. Richards 1936:37–41.
16. The view of literary language as “defamiliarization” has been greatly extended
in modem times by the Russian Formalist School, leading to Roman Jakobson’s
famous definition of poetry as “organized violence committed on ordinary speech”;
see Erlich 1981:219.
17. Lit. “in bare words”; Aristotle has no technical term for prose.
18. Perhaps the earliest statement in criticism that the greatest art is to disguise art.

BOOK 3, Chapter 2

199

the opposite; for people become resentful, as at someone plotting
against them, just as they are at those adulterating wines.) An example is the success of Theodorus’ voice when contrasted with that
of other actors; for his seems the voice of the actual character, but the
others’ those of somebody else.19 5. The “theft” is well done if one
composes by choosing words from ordinary language. Euripides does
this and first showed the way.
Since speech is made up of nouns and verbs,20 and the species of
nouns are those examined in the Poetics, from among these one
should use glosses21 and double words and coinages rarely and in a
limited number of situations. (We shall later [3.7] explain where; the
reason has already been given: the usage departs from the appropriate in the direction of excess.) 6. A word in its prevailing and native
meaning and metaphor are alone useful in the lexis of prose. A sign
of this is that these are the only kinds of words everybody uses; for all
people carry on their conversations with metaphors22 and words in
their native and prevailing meanings.
n Metaphora is itself a metaphor and literally means “carrying something
from one place to another, transference.” The word first occurs in Isocrates’
Evagoras 9, where the author claims to banish metaphors from his prose. In
Poetics 21.7 Aristotle defines metaphor as “a movement [epiphora] of an
alien [allotrios] name either from genus to species or from species to genus
or from species to species or by analogy”; see Appendix I.G. There is a vast
bibliography on Aristotle’s concept of the metaphor and its subsequent
influence; see Kirby 1997. On the difference between its function in poetics
and rhetoric, see Ricoeur 1977:7–43. He says (p. 20) that the Aristotelian
idea of allotrios tends to assimilate three distinct ideas: deviation from
ordinary usage, borrowing from an original usage, and substitution for an
absent word by an available ordinary word. Aristotle will discuss metaphor
in greater detail in chapters 4 and 10.

19. The statement sounds as though Theodorus was still acting when Aristotle first
wrote this passage; that would date it to the mid-350s b.c.e.; see Burkert 1975.
20. Onomata, “name words” (including adjectives) and rhBmata, “sayings, verbs,
predicates,” are the two major parts of speech recognized by Aristotle. In 3.5.2 he
adds syndesmoi, “connectives.” Full categorization of parts of speeches was largely a
development of the study of grammar in the third to the first century b.c.e.
21. Strange or rare words; see 3.3.2.
22. Ordinary language contains many metaphorical expressions that have often lost
their force, e.g. “It’s raining cats and dogs,” “The sun is smiling,” etc.

200

1405a

On Rhetoric

Thus, it is clear that if one composes well there will be an unfamiliar quality and it escapes notice and will be clear. This, we said,
was the virtue of rhetorical language. 7. The kind of words useful to
a sophist are homonyms (by means of these he does his dirty work),
to a poet synonyms. By words that are both in their prevailing meaning and synonymous I mean, for example, go and walk; for when used
in their prevailing sense these are synonymous with each other.
Now what each kind of word is and how many species of metaphor
there are and that metaphor has very great effect both in poetry and
speeches has been said, as noted above, in the Poetics. 8. In speech it
is necessary to take special pains to the extent that a speech has fewer
resources than verse. Metaphor especially has clarity and sweetness
and strangeness, and its use cannot be learned from someone else.23
9. One should speak both epithets and metaphors that are appropriate,
and this will be from an analogy. If not, the expression seems inappropriate because opposites are most evident when side-by-side each
other. But one should consider what suits an old man, just as a scarlet
cloak is right for a young one; for the same clothes are not right [for
both]. 10. And if you wish to adorn, borrow the metaphor from something better in the same genus, if to denigrate, from worse things. I
mean, for example, since they are opposites in the same genus, saying of a person who begs that he “prays” or that a person praying
“begs,” because both are forms of asking, is composing in the way
described; as also when Iphicrates called Callias a “begging priest”
rather than a “torchbearer” and the latter replied that Iphicrates was
not initiated into the Mysteries or he would not have called him a
begging priest but a torchbearer;24 for both are religious epithets,
but one is honorable, one dishonorable. Then there are the “parasites
of Dionysus,” but the persons in question call themselves “artistes.”
These are both metaphors, the former one that sullies, the profession,
the latter the contrary. Pirates now call themselves “businessmen.”
Thus, one can say that a criminal “has made a mistake” or that someone making a mistake “has committed a crime” or that a thief both
took and “plundered.” A phrase like that of Euripides’ Telephus,
23. Cf. Poetics 22.17, where it is also said that an ability to use metaphor is a “sign
of natural ability.”
24. The incident probably took place about 390 b.c.e., when both served in a war
between Athens and Sparta; see Xenophon, Hellenica 6.3.3. Callias was a hereditary
torchbearer in the Mysteries and apparently thought Iphicrates was ignorant. Though
a prominent Athenian general, he came from humble origins and had family connections with the barbarous Thracians.

BOOK 3, Chapter 2

201

“lording the oar and landed in Mysia,” is inappropriate [in prose],
since lording is too elevated; there is no “theft” [if the metaphor is too
flagrant].
11. There is a fault in the syllables if the indications of sound are
unpleasant; for example, Dionysius the Brazen25 in his Elegies calls
poetry “Calliope’s screech” because both are sounds; but the metaphor
is bad because it implies meaningless sounds. 12. Further, metaphor
should be used in naming something that does not have a proper name
of its own26 and [it should] not be far-fetched but taken from things
that are related and of similar species, so that it is clear the term is
related; for example, in the popular riddle [ainigma], “I saw a man
gluing bronze on another with fire,”27 the process has no name,
but both are a kind of application; the application of the cupping
instrument is thus called “gluing.” From good riddling it is generally
possible to derive appropriate metaphors; for metaphors are made
like riddles; thus, clearly, [a metaphor from a good riddle] is an apt
transference of words.
13. And the source of the metaphor should be something beautiful;
verbal beauty, as Licymnius says,28 is in the sound or in the sense, and
ugliness the same; and thirdly there is what refutes the sophistic argument: for it is not as Bryson29 said that nothing is in itself ugly, since
it signifies the same thing if one word is used rather than another; for
this is false; one word is more proper than another and more like the
object signified and more adapted to making the thing appear “before
the eyes.”30 Moreover, one word does not signify in the same way as
another, so in this sense also we should posit one as more beautiful
or uglier than another; for both signify the beautiful or the ugly, but
not solely as beauty or ugliness.31 Or if they do, [it is] only in degree.
25. So called because he first proposed (early fifth century b.c.e.) the use of bronze
rather than silver money at Athens.
26. This is known as katakhrBsis or abusio, but to regard it as metaphor is sometimes
thought inconsistent with a rigorous substitution theory; cf. Genette 1982:50 –52.
27. The answer to the riddle is “cupping” or “bleeding,” done by a physician with
a hot bronze cup (in modern times a glass) that draws out blood as it cools.
28. The rhetorician mentioned in Plato’s Phaedrus (267c2) as having written an
account of beautiful words.
29. Sophist and mathematician, contemporary with Aristotle. The view here
expressed was taken up later by the Stoics; see Cicero, Letters to His Friends 9.22.1.
30. This concept will be discussed in chapters 10–11.
31. Cf. the difference between vase, jar, pot, and jug. Aristotle here seems to imply
belief in some natural link between some words and their meaning as discussed in
Plato’s Cratylus, though elsewhere he regards words as symbols rather than icons.

1405b

202

On Rhetoric

These are sources from which metaphors should be taken: from the
beautiful either in sound or in meaning or in visualization or in some
other form of sense perception. It makes a difference whether the dawn
is called “rosy-fingered”32 or “purple-fingered” or worse still, “redfingered.” 14. In the use of epithets the transference is also sometimes
from the bad or ugly, for example, mother-slayer, sometimes from the
better, for example, avenger of his father.33 When the winner in a
mule race offered Simonides a paltry sum [for an ode in honor of his
victory], he declined the commission as though annoyed at composing about “half-asses”; but when the winner paid enough, he wrote,
“Hail, daughters of storm-footed mares!”34 Nevertheless, they were
daughters of asses. 15. The same effect can be achieved by diminution.
A diminutive [hypokorismos] makes both bad and good less so, as
Aristophanes does sarcastically in the Babylonians35 when he substitutes goldlet for gold, cloaklet for cloak, insultlet for insult, and
diseaselet [for disease]. But one should be careful and observe
moderation in both [epithets and diminutives].
Chapter 3: Ta Psykhra, or Frigidities
n Having discussed virtues of style, Aristotle now turns briefly to their
opposites, the faults that come from violating the principles of clarity and
appropriateness in choice of words and that make the language “frigid.”
Longinus follows the same approach in chapters 3–4 of On Sublimity.
Frigidity, Aristotle says, may result from the use of ponderous compounds—
often coined by the speaker—from unfamiliar words, from inappropriate
epithets, and from far-fetched metaphors.

1406a

1. Frigidities [ta psykhra] in lexis come about in four ways: [first] in
double words,36 as in Lycophron’s phrase “the many-faced heaven
of the great-summited earth” and “the narrow-passaged shore” and
as Gorgias spoke of “beggar-mused flatterers, forsworn and rightsolemnly sworn” and as in Alcidamas’ expression, “his soul full of
32. As frequently in the Homeric poems.
33. Either epithet could be applied to Orestes, as in Euripides, Orestes 1587–1588.
34. Simonides of Ceos (c. 556–468 b.c.e.), frag. 10.
35. Produced 426 b.c.e., now lost; frag. 90.
36. Or compounds, which Aristotle thinks of as poetic. Greek, like German, forms
compounds easily, and though the result is intelligible, it can also be pompous.
Elaborate compounds were especially characteristic of the tragic style of Aeschylus
and are ridiculed in Aristophanes’ Frogs 830–894.

BOOK 3, Chapter 3

203

anger and his face becoming fire-colored” and “end-fulfilling deemed
he their zeal would be” and “end-fulfilling he made the persuasion of
his words,” and the foam of the sea was “copper-blue.”37 All these
seem poetic because of the doubling.
2. This is one cause of frigidity, and another is the use of glosses,38
as when Lycophron called Xerxes “a monster man”39 and Sciron “a
sinis man”40 and Alcidamas spoke of “[bringing no such] toys to
poetry” and “the wretchedlessness of his nature” and one who had
been “whetted with the unmixed anger of his thought.”
3. Third is use of epithets that are long or untimely or frequent.41
In poetry it is appropriate to speak of “white milk,”42 but in a speech
such things are not only rather unsuitable, but if used immoderately
they convict [the writer of artificiality] and make it clear that this is
“poetry.” Though there is some need to use them (for they change
what is ordinary and make the lexis unfamiliar), nevertheless one
should aim at the mean, for it does less harm than speaking carelessly;
carelessness lacks merit, moderation lacks fault. As a result, Alcidamas’
phrases seem frigid; for he uses epithets not as seasonings but as
the main course, so frequent, extended, and conspicuous are they; for
instance, not “sweat” but “wet sweat”; not “to the Isthmian games”
but “to the convocation of the Isthmian games”; not “laws” but “the
royal laws of cities”; not “in a race” but “in a racing impulse of the
soul”; not “museion”43 but adding “Nature’s museion”; and “sullenvisaged the thought of his soul”; and the artificer not of “favor” but of
“pandemic favor,” and “steward of the pleasure of the listeners,” and
hidden not by “boughs” but “boughs of the wood,” and not “he
covered his body” but “he covered his body’s shame,” and “antimimicking was the desire of his soul” (this is at one and the same
37. Lycophron and Alcidamas, like Gorgias, were sophists of the late fifth and early
fourth centuries b.c.e. who used poetic language in prose.
38. Lit. “tongues.” The term gloss comes to be used chiefly of archaic, foreign, or
rare words, but Aristotle means anything that sounds strange and might puzzle an
audience; cf 3.10.2. In Poetics 21.6 (see Appendix I.G) a gloss is defined as a word
“other people use,” thus borrowed from another dialect or language. In modern usage,
a gloss is an explanatory word or phrase.
39. PelDron, “monster,” is the reading of Parisinus 1741 and could be called a gloss
because it was archaic.
40. Sinis means “ravager”; both Sciron and Sinis were famous robbers.
41. By epithet (“what is added on”) is meant a descriptive adjective or phrase.
42. Common in the United States today, but Aristotle did not know about chocolate milk.
43. “Place, or haunt, of the Muses.” English “museum.”

204

1406b

On Rhetoric

time both a compound and an epithet, so the result is poetry), and “so
extravagant an excess of wickedness.” Thus, by speaking poetically
in an inappropriate way [Alcidamas and other sophists] impart absurdity and frigidity, and also lack of clarity because of the verbiage; for
when a speaker throws more words at someone who already understands, he destroys the clarity by the darkness. People coin double
words when something has no name of its own and the word is easily
formed, as is “pastime” [to khronotribein]. But if there is much of
this, [the diction] becomes completely poetical. Thus, lexis using
double words is most useful to dithyrambic poets, for they are sensitive to sound,44 but glosses to epic poets, for they are stately and
self-assured.45
4. The fourth kind of frigidity occurs in metaphors; for there are
inappropriate metaphors, some because they are laughable (comic
poets, too, use metaphor), some because too lofty and tragic. And
they are unclear if far-fetched, for example, Gorgias’ phrase about
“pale and bloodless doings,” or “You have sown shamefully and have
reaped badly.” These are too poetic. And as Alcidamas calls philosophy “a fortress against the laws”46 and the Odyssey “a fair mirror
of human life” and “bringing no such toys to poetry.” All these are
unpersuasive for the reasons given.47 Yet Gorgias’ exclamation to the
swallow when she flew down and let go her droppings on him is in
the best tragic manner: he said, “Shame on you, Philomela”; for if a
bird did it there was no shame, but [it would have been] shameful for
a maiden. He thus rebuked the bird well by calling it what it once had
been rather than what it now was.48

44. A dithyramb was originally a hymn to Bacchus, thus somewhat wild and metrically varied; in the late fifth century b.c.e. it became a narrative vehicle for virtuoso
performers, of whom Timotheus is the best known.
45. The manuscripts continue, “metaphor to iambic poets, for they now use these,
as has been said.” But this was probably a marginal comment by some later reader,
then copied into the text. The cross-reference is to the end of 3.1.
46. Perhaps meaning that philosophy offers courage or consolation in the face
of legal injustice, as in the case of Socrates when condemned to death (or later in
Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy).
47. Some of the expressions Aristotle finds affected in Greek may be acceptable in
English. The context of their use determines their suitability, and two thousand and
more years of literature have dulled the ear for many metaphors.
48. In Greek mythology Philomela (in some versions her sister Procne) was transformed into a swallow by the gods. On this passage see Rosenmeyer 1955.

BOOK 3, Chapter 4

205

Chapter 4: Eikdn, or Simile
n An eikXn is a “likeness” (cf. English icon). Though Aristotle views the
simile as a characteristic poetic device, seen especially in the extended
similes of epic poetry, simile is not discussed in the Poetics. In this chapter of
the Rhetoric it is treated as an expanded form of metaphor: a metaphor, that
is, with an explicit comparison, whether provided by a verb, adjective, or
adverb. Later rhetoricians often reverse this concept, taking a metaphor to
be an abbreviated or condensed simile and regarding a simile as a figure of
speech, involving several words, while a metaphor is a trope, the “turning”
of the meaning of a single word. The distinction between tropes and figures
is not explicit in Aristotle’s work and is a development of his successors in
the Hellenistic period. Aristotle has discussed parabolV, or comparison, as a
topic of invention in 2.20.2–7, but neither there nor here does he relate it
to simile, which he regards purely as a device of style; see McCall 1969;
Ricoeur 1977; Tamba-Mercz and Veyne 1979; Kirby 1997 (the latter a semiotic approach).

1. A simile is also a metaphor; for there is little difference: when the
poet says, “He rushed as a lion,” it is a simile, but “The lion rushed”
[with “lion” referring to a man] would be a metaphor; for since both
are brave, he used a metaphor [i.e., a simile] and spoke of Achilles as
a lion.49 2. The simile is useful also in speech, but only on a few occasions; for it is poetic. [Similes] should be brought in like metaphors;
for they are metaphors, differing in the form of expression. 3.
Examples of similes are what Androtion said to Idreus, that he was
“like puppies that have been chained”; for they jump to bite, and
Idreus, freed from prison, was vicious.50 And the way Theodamus
likened Archidamus to “a Euxenus that does not know geometry”;
this is from analogy, for Euxenus will then be an Archidamus who
knows geometry.51 And the one in the Republic of Plato, that those
who strip the dead [on the battlefield] are like curs that snap at stones
but do not bite the throwers; and the one applied to the citizen body,
49. The simile of Achilles and the lion occurs in Iliad 20.164. “The lion rushed,”
meaning Achilles, does not occur in the Homeric poems; thus, Aristotle says would
be. Early Greek literature makes rather little use of metaphor, except for personification of abstract forces, but much of simile; see Stanford 1936.
50. Androtion was a fourth-century b.c.e. Athenian politician, best known from
Demosthenes’ speech against him in 346. Idreus succeeded Mausolus as king of Caria
in 351.
51. I.e., they are equally stupid, except that Euxenus knows some geometry.

206

1407a

On Rhetoric

that it is like a ship’s captain who is strong but deaf; and the one about
the verses of poets, that they are like youths without beauty (for when
the latter have lost their bloom of youth and the former their meter
they do not seem the same).52 And Pericles’ simile for the Samians,
that they are like children who accept the candy but keep crying,
and his remark about the Boeotians, that they are like oaks (for oaks
are felled by oaks,53 and the Boeotians by fighting each other). And
Demosthenes’ [simile] about the citizen body, that it is like those sick
on board ship.54 And the way Democritus likened orators to nannies
who, after swallowing the pabulum, moisten the baby’s lips with their
spit. And the way Antisthenes compared skinny Cephisodotus to
incense, because “He gives pleasure by wasting away.” All these can
be spoken both as similes and as metaphors, so whichever are liked
when spoken as metaphors clearly will make similes too, and similes
are metaphors needing55 an explanatory word. 4. Metaphor from analogy should always have a correspondence between the two species
of the same genus: thus, if the wine cup is the “shield” of Dionysus,
the shield can fittingly be called the “cup” of Ares.56 Speech, then, is
composed from these things.57
Chapter 5: To Hellbnizein, or Grammatical Correctness
n In chapters 5–12 attention turns to style as seen in combination of words
into sentences. The first subject discussed is what Aristotle calls “speaking
Greek,” by which he means observance of the rules of grammar and the
conventions of idiom of the language, but much of what he says really relates
more to clarity than to correctness. Perhaps the chapter is a survival of some
earlier thoughts on clarity, placed here because it deals with composition
rather than with word choice. Although Protagoras and other sophists

52. The passages are Republic 5.469e, 6.488a, and 10.601b, respectively.
53. Perhaps from thrashing in a storm, more likely from being cut down by oakhandled axes or with oak wedges.
54. Probably not Demosthenes the famous orator, whom Aristotle seems to avoid
quoting, presumably because of his hostility to Macedon; perhaps the fifth-century
b.c.e. general of the same name.
55. When the metaphor would be obscure or too violent, it “needs” to be recast as
a simile.
56. On metaphor from analogy, see Poetics 21.11–14 in Appendix I.G, where the
same example is given.
57. That is, from the different kinds of words discussed earlier: kyria, glosses, compounds, coined words, and metaphors, including epithets and similes.

BOOK 3, Chapter 5

207

had made a start at the study of grammar, it was in Aristotle’s time still a
relatively undeveloped field of study. Systematic grammars of the Greek
language did not appear until the second century B.C.E., when they reflect
the research of Stoic philosophers. The oldest surviving Greek grammar
book is the work of Dionysius Thrax; he came from Alexandria and became
a celebrated teacher at Rhodes in the years before and after 100 B.C.E.

1. The first principle [arkhB] of lexis is to speak [good] Greek [to
hellBnizein]. 2. This is done in five ways:58 first is in the [correct] use
of connective particles, when a speaker preserves the natural response
between those that are prior and those that are posterior to each other,
as some require. Thus, ho men [“He on the one hand . . .”] and ho ego
[“I on the one hand . . .”] require [in a subsequent clause] de [“on the
other hand . . .”] and ho de [“he on the other hand . . .”] respectively.
The correlatives should occur while the first expression is still in the
mind and not be widely separated, nor should another connective be
substituted for the one needed; for it is rarely appropriate: “But I,
when he spoke to me (for there came Cleon both begging and
demanding), went, taking them along.” In these words many connectives are thrown in, in place of what is expected; and if the interval is
long, the result is unclear.59
3. On the one hand, then, one merit is found in the use of connectives, a second, on the other hand, in calling things by their
specific names and not by circumlocutions.60 4. Third is not to use
amphibolies61—unless the opposite effect [obscurity] is being sought.
People do this when they have nothing to say but are pretending to
58. Others could easily be added, and the chapter is one of the least satisfactory in
the Rhetoric.
59. The example (perhaps a quotation) seems poorly chosen and does not involve
the use of correlatives, though it does use a number of words that Aristotle would have
regarded as connectives (“but, when, for, both, and”). Its faults come from the cumbersome syntax, not from separating connectives or failing to use the expected
responses. As notes to earlier chapters indicate, Aristotle himself was capable of writing awkward sentences as bad or worse than this, including long parentheses where
the reader can easily forget the beginning of the sentence—but of course the Rhetoric
is neither a speech nor a work of artistic literature. In his published dialogues his
language was regarded as elegant and correct; see, e.g., Quintilian 10.1.83.
60. Aristotle illustrates the correct use of correlatives, but fails to supply an
example of this point.
61. An amphiboly (lit. “what shoots both ways”) is an equivocation based on a
word or phrase with an ambiguous meaning, often creating a fallacious argument; see
3.18.5.

208

1407b

On Rhetoric

say something. Such are those [philosophers] who speak in poetry,
Empedocles, for example. When there is much going around in a
circle, it cheats the listeners and they feel the way many do about
oracles: whenever the latter speak amphibolies most people nod
assent: “Croesus, by crossing the Halys [river], will destroy a great
kingdom.”62 Since there is generally less chance of a mistake, oracles
speak of any matter in generalities. In the game of knucklebones one
can win more often by calling “odd” or “even” than by specifying a
particular number of counters, and the same is true about what will
happen in contrast to when it will happen, which is why soothsayers
do not specify the time. All these things are alike, so they should be
avoided except for the reason mentioned.
5. The fourth [rule is to observe] Protagoras’ classification of the
gender of nouns: masculine, feminine, and neuter. There should be
correct grammatical agreement: “Having come and having spoken,
she departed.”63 6. Fifth is the correct naming of plural and singular:
“Having come, they beat me.” What is written should generally be
easy to read and easy to speak—which is the same thing. Use of many
connectives64 does not have this quality, nor do phrases not easily
punctuated,65 for example, the writings of Heraclitus. To punctuate
the writings of Heraclitus is a difficult task because it is unclear what
goes with what, whether with what follows or with what precedes.
For example, in the very beginning of his treatise he says, “Of this
Logos that exists always ignorant are men.” It is unclear whether
“always” goes with what precedes [or what follows]. 7. Further, the
lack of correspondence creates a solecism66 if you do not join words
with what fits both; for example, if you are speaking of sound and
color, seeing is not common to them, but perceiving is. And it is
unclear if you do not first set forth what you are talking about when
you are going to throw in much in the middle; for example, “I
62. A famous ambiguous response by the Delphic oracle to Croesus, king of Lydia.
He interpreted it as encouragement, but the kingdom destroyed was his own.
63. In Greek the participles modifying “she” have distinct feminine forms; in the
next example the participle is in the masculine plural to agree with “they.”
64. Polloi syndesmoi, or polysyndeton, regarded by later rhetoricians as a figure of
speech involving a surfeit of conjunctions: i.e., A and B and C, etc., rather than A, B,
C. . . .
65. Classical Greek was generally written without punctuation and even without
spacing between the words; it thus had to be “punctuated” by the reader.
66. A mistake in usage or syntax; in later grammatical and rhetorical theory contrasted to a “barbarism” or mistake in the form of a word.

BOOK 3, Chapter 6

209

intended, after talking with that man about this and that and in this
way, to go,” instead of “I intended, after talking with that man, to go”
and then “This and that transpired and in this way.”
Chapter 6: Onkos, or Expansiveness, and Syntomia, or Conciseness
n Onkos literally means “bulk, mass, swelling”; here it implies “elevation,
dignity,” though in later writers it is often a pejorative term for swollen style.
As Aristotle implies in section 7, onkos can be regarded as a stylistic form of
auxVsis, amplification, of which some inventional aspects were discussed in
2.18.4, 2.19.26, and 2.26. Note the prescriptive tone of this chapter with its
practical advice on how to amplify. As in the case of arguments in Books
1–2, Aristotle is setting out “available” techniques. Although it appears
several times in Demetrius’ treatise On Style (a work showing strong
Aristotelian influence), onkos did not gain acceptance among later rhetoricians as a technical term.

1. The following things contribute to expansiveness [onkos] in
expression: to use a definition instead of a word; for example, not
circle but “a plane figure equidistant from the center.” For conciseness [syntomia], [one should make use of] the opposite: the word for
the definition. 2. And if something is shameful or inappropriate, if the
shame is in the definition, use the word, and if in the word, use the
definition. 3. And make something clear by metaphor and epithets,
while guarding against the poetic. 4. And make the singular plural,
as poets do: though there is a single harbor, they say “to Achaean
harbors,” and “the tablet’s many-leaved folds.”67 5. And do not join
[words with a single definite article] but use one article with each:
tBs gynaikos tBs hBmeteras; but for conciseness the opposite: tBs
hBmeteras gynaikos.68 And speak [expansively] with a conjunction,
but if concisely, without a conjunction, yet not without grammatical
connection; for example, “having gone and having conversed” compared with “having gone, I conversed.” 7. Antimachus’69 technique of
describing something on the basis of properties it does not have is
also useful; he applies it to Teumessos [in the passage beginning],
67. Of a writing tablet made up of only two pieces of thin wood, joined together
loosely.
68. Cope ( [1877] 1970, 3:67) captured the difference in English by that wife of
ours as contrasted with our wife.
69. Greek poet of about 400 b.c.e., author of an epic on the Theban cycle.

1408a

210

On Rhetoric

“There is a windy little hill. . . .” Amplification of this sort can go on
indefinitely.70 What it is not can be said of things good and bad,
whichever is useful. This is the source of words the poets introduce
such as stringless or lyreless music; for they apply privatives. This is
popular when expressed in metaphors by analogy; for example, to say
the trumpet is “lyreless music.”
Chapter 7: To Prepon, or Appropriateness, Propriety
n The beginning of chapter 2 identified appropriateness of style to subject
as a necessary quality of good speaking or writing. In this chapter Aristotle
explains the concept more fully.

1. The lexis will be appropriate if it expresses emotion and character
and is proportional to the subject matter. 2. Proportion exists if there
is neither discussion of weighty matters [euonkDn] in a casual way
nor shoddy things solemnly and if ornament is not attached to a
shoddy word. Otherwise, the result seems comedy, like the [tragic]
poetry Cleophon composes. Some of what he used to say is like calling a fig “Madame.” 3. Emotion is expressed if the style, in the case
of insolence [hybris], is that of an angry man; in the case of impious
and shameful things if it is that of one who is indignant and reluctant
even to say the words; in the case of admirable things, [if they are
spoken] in a submissive manner; and similarly in other cases. 4. The
proper lexis also makes the matter credible: the mind [of listeners]
draws a false inference of the truth of what a speaker says because
they feel the same about such things, so they think the facts to be so,
even if they are not as the speaker represents them; 5. and the hearer
suffers along with the pathetic speaker, even if what he says amounts
to nothing. As a result, many overwhelm their hearers by making
noise.
6. Proof from signs is expressive of character, because there is an
appropriate style for each genus and moral state. By genus I mean
things like age (boy, man, old man; or woman and man or Spartan and
Thessalian) and by moral state [hexis] the principles by which someone is the kind of person he is in life; 7. for lives do not have the same
character in accordance with [each and] every moral state.71 If, then,
70. Cf. Christian amplification of the glory of God or of Christ: “without beginning
or end, ineffable, unbegotten, etc.”
71. Cf. Nicomachean Ethics 2.1.

BOOK 3, Chapter 7

211

a person speaks words appropriate to his moral state, he will create a
sense of character. A rustic and an educated person would not say
the same thing nor [say it] in the same way. Listeners react also to
expressions speechwriters72 use to excess: “Who does not know?”
“Everybody knows. . . .” The listener agrees out of embarrassment in
order to share in the feelings of all others.
8. Opportune or inopportune usage is a factor common to all
species [of rhetoric]. 9. There is a commonly used defense for every
hyperbole: the speaker should preempt criticism;73 for something
seems true when the speaker does not conceal what he is doing. 10.
Further, do not use all analogous effects [of sound and sense]
together; for thus the hearer is tricked. I mean, for example, if the
words are harsh, do not deliver them with a harsh voice and countenance. Otherwise, what you are doing is evident. But if sometimes
one feature is present, sometimes not, you accomplish the same thing
without being noticed. But if, as a result, gentle things are said
harshly and harsh things gently, the result is unpersuasive.
11. Double words and frequent epithets and especially unfamiliar
words suit one speaking passionately; for it is excusable that an angry
person calls a wrong “heaven-high” or “monstrous.” And [this can be
done] when a speaker already holds the audience in his control and
causes them to be stirred either by praise or blame or hate or love, as
Isocrates does at the end of the Panegyricus: “[How great the] fame
and name . . .” and [earlier] “who endured . . . [to see the city made
desolate?”].74 Those who are empassioned mouth such utterances and
audiences clearly accept them because they are in a similar mood.
That is why [this emotional style] is suited also to poetry; for poetry
is inspired. It should either be used as described or in mockery
[eirDneia], as Gorgias did and as in the Phaedrus.75

72. Logographers, i.e., professional writers, like Lysias, of speeches for clients to
deliver in the law courts, some of whom were rather simple people.
73. The better manuscripts give should add a censure; but ancient rhetoricians
(e.g., Quintilian 8.3.37) advised anticipation (“You may not want to believe what I am
going to say, but . . .”). Some scribe may have wrongly inserted the single letter
(sigma) that makes the difference in meaning.
74. Reference to Isocrates’ Panegyricus 186 and 96, respectively, slightly misquoted, probably from memory. Isocrates’ text of the first quotation has “fame and
memory.”
75. Cf. Gorgias’ mockery of the swallow, cited in 3.3.4; Plato, Phaedrus 231d,
241e.

1408b

212

On Rhetoric

Chapter 8: Rhythm in Prose
n A sense of rhythm begins to be evident in some Greek prose of the
late fifth century B.C.E., but real feeling for it is first seen in the writings of
Plato, Isocrates, and Demosthenes in the fourth. Demosthenes in particular
(though ignored by Aristotle) avoids a succession of short syllables. The
reader needs to keep in mind that Greek (and Latin in the classical period)
rhythm was quantitative, based not on stress but on long and short syllables.
With a few exceptions, a syllable was regarded as “long” if it contained a
long vowel (e.g., eta or omega), a diphthong, or a short vowel followed by
two or more consonants.

1. The form of the language76 should be neither metrical nor unrhythmical. The former is unpersuasive (for it seems to have been consciously shaped) and at the same time also diverts attention; for it
causes [the listener] to pay attention to when the same foot will come
again—as when children anticipate the call of heralds (in the law
courts): “Whom does the freedman choose as his sponsor?” [The
children call out] “Cleon!”77 2. But what is unrhythmical is unlimited,
and there should be a limit, but not by use of meter; for the unlimited
is unpleasant and unknowable.78 And all things are limited by number. In the case of the form of language, number is rhythm, of which
the meters are segments. 3. Thus, speech should have rhythm but not
meter; for the latter will be a poem. The rhythm should not be exact.
This will be achieved if it is [regular] only up to a point.79
4. Of rhythms, the heroic [dactylic hexameter] is dignified and not
conversational and needs musical intonation;80 the iambic by itself is
the language of the many; thus all people most often speak in iambics.
76. To skhBma tBs lexeDs, the term adopted by later rhetoricians for “figure of
speech,” but here meaning the language’s rhythmical configuration.
77. The example does not well illustrate Aristotle’s point and is rather odd in other
ways. A herald is calling for some citizen to take the case of a non-citizen not legally
entitled to speak. Cleon, the late-fifth century b.c.e. demagogue, apparently took such
cases. Court rooms were unroofed and open to the public, and apparently children
hung around there in search of amusement. It seems that children in Aristotle’s time
still chanted this call for Cleon, who was long dead.
78. A basic Aristotelian principle in metaphysics, physics, and other sciences;
cf. Metaphysics 3.4.999a27.
79. Prose rhythm, like other aspects of style, should be a mean between the
conversational and the poetic.
80. That is, it needs to be chanted. In Aristotle’s time rhapsodists no longer accompanied themselves on the lyre as had been the case in earlier centuries.

BOOK 3, Chapter 8

213

But [oratory] should be dignified and moving. The trochaic meter is
rather too much of a comic dance, as is clear from trochaic tetrameters; for they are a tripping rhythm. What remains is the paean; it
came into use beginning with Thrasymachus, though at the time people did not recognize what it was. The paean is a third kind of rhythm,
related to those under discussion; for it has the ratio of three to two
[three short syllables and one long, the latter equal in time to two
beats], whereas the others are one to one [the heroic, with one long
and two shorts] or two to one [iambic and trochaic, a long and a short
or a short and a long, respectively]. And one-and-a-half [the proportion of three to two] is the mean ratio and this is what a paean is. 5.
The other rhythms should be avoided for the reasons given and
because they are [poetic] meters; and the paean should be adopted;
for it alone of the rhythms mentioned is not a meter, and thus its presence most escapes notice. As it is, only one paean is in use, both for
beginning and ending, but it is necessary to distinguish the opening
from the closing. 6. There are two species of paean opposite to each
other, of which one [called a first paean] is suitable for an opening, as
it is now used. This is the one that begins with a long syllable and ends
with three shorts: DGlogenes/eite Lukian and khryseokoma Hekate/pai
Dios; the other [called a fourth paean] is the opposite, where three
shorts begin and a long ends: meta de gGn/hudata t’Jkeanon Hphanise
nKx. This makes an ending, for a short syllable [at the end] makes the
expression seem cut short. It should instead be cut off with a long
syllable and be a clear termination, not through the action of a scribe
or the presence of a marginal mark81 but through the rhythm. 7. That
lexis should, therefore, be rhythmical and not unrhythmical and what
rhythms make it well rhythmed and what they are like has been said.
n Aristotle’s account of prose rhythm is unsatisfactory in several ways. He
seems to be the victim of an unrealistic theoretical approach. Despite what
he says, the paean was sometimes used in lyric poetry; the examples of
paeans he cites are all from poetry, probably from poems by Simonides of
Ceos. Conversely, the paean is very rare in prose. Most serious is his failure
to consider the cretic (long-short-long), which has the same proportions as
the paean and is the commonest prose rhythm in Greek and Latin literary
prose and oratory. Indeed, a paean can be regarded as a cretic with one of
81. ParagraphB. Though written punctuation was undeveloped in Aristotle’s time,
a mark was often made in the margin to indicate the change of speaker in a play or
dialogue.

1409a

214

On Rhetoric

the long syllables resolved into two shorts. Finally, a short syllable at the end
of a verse was regarded as lengthened by its position, and later rhetoricians
extended this rule to prose rhythm; cf. Cicero, Orator 217 and Quintilian’s
comment in 9.4.93.

Chapter 9: Periodic Style
n This chapter also has problems. One is the extent to which Aristotle
thought of a period as essentially a rhythmical unit. He says it has magnitude, is limited, and has number; he equates it with a line of verse in section
4; and the need for rhythm might be assumed from the previous chapter,
but he does not here specifically speak of rhythms or identify rhythms in the
prose quotations that begin in section 7. (See Fowler 1982, who denied that
rhythm is involved, and, on the other side of the question, Adamik 1984.)
The most conspicuous features of a period as Aristotle understands it,
and of its subdivision called a kXlon, seem to be some syntactical completion
(at least a complete phrase), unitary thought, and length that is a mean
between “too short” and “too long,” in order for the hearer to grasp the
thought easily. Aristotle does not use the word periodos to mean one of the
long, complex sentences of Isocrates (favored later by Cicero and many early
modern English writers). He quotes parts of Isocrates’ complex sentences as
examples of periods, but does not analyze the sentences as a whole. Apparently
he viewed a long Isocratean sentence as made up of several periods.
Periodos, from peri (around) and hodos (road), another of Aristotle’s
visual metaphors, suggests a circular motion, but as the examples cited
show, the technique is more one of antithesis and balance than circularity.
Aristotle may not have originated the use of periodos as a grammaticalstylistic term. The Byzantine encyclopedia Suda attributes it to Thrasymachus.

1. The lexis [of formal speech and artistic prose] is necessarily either
strung-on [eiromenB]82 and given unity by connection, like the preludes in dithyrambs, or turned-down (katestrammenB) and like the
antistrophes of the ancient poets. 2. The strung-on style is the ancient
one;83 for in the past all used it, but now not many do. I call that
82. Or “running,” strung together with connectives. Though this is seen in what is
called paratactic sentence structure such as “We met and we went for a walk and then
we had a drink . . . ,” Aristotle is probably thinking of smaller units, as in polysyndeton; for otherwise it is not the opposite of periodic style as he describes it.
83. The manuscripts insert here a misquotation of the opening of Herodotus’
Histories: “Of Herodotus of Thurii this is the account of the investigation.” Kassel
(1976) double-bracketed this as a late addition by Aristotle. Though Herodotus’ work
regularly utilizes the strung-on style, this opening sentence does not illustrate it; see
Dillery 1992.

BOOK 3, Chapter 9

215

strung-on which has no end in itself unless the thing being said has
been completed. It is unpleasant because it is unlimited; for all wish
to foresee the end. Thus, as they complete the course [runners] pant
and are exhausted; for they do not tire before the goal is in sight.
3. This, then, is the strung-on style of composition, but the turneddown style is that in periods. I call a period an expression having
a beginning and an end in itself and a magnitude easily taken in at
a glance. Such a style is pleasant and easily understood, pleasant
because opposed to the unlimited and because the hearer always
thinks he has hold of something, in that it is always limited by itself,
whereas to have nothing to foresee or attain is unpleasant. And it is
easily understood because easily retained in the mind. This is because
utterance in periods has number, which is the most easily retained
thing. Thus, all people remember verse better than prose;84 for it
has number by which it is measured. 4. But a period should also be
complete in thought and not cut off, as it is in iambic lines:
Calydon is this land, of Pelops soil . . .85

Because of the line division it is possible to misunderstand the meaning, as though in this quotation Calydon was in the Peloponnesus.
5. A period is either divided into cola or simple.86 Lexis in cola is
both complete and divided and easily uttered by the breath, not in its
division but in the whole. A colon is one of the two parts of a period.
I call a period simple when it has only one colon. 6. The cola and the
periods should be neither stubby nor long. A short one often causes
the hearer a bump; for when [his mind] is rushing toward what is to
come and its measure, of which he has his own definition, he is pulled
up short by the speaker’s pausing and trips, as it were, at the abrupt
close. Long ones cause him to be left behind, as do those racers who
go wide at the turning point;87 for they, too, lose contact with their
fellows. Similarly, long periods turn into a logos and are like a
84. KhydBn, “heaped up, indiscriminate.”
85. Attributed by the manuscripts to Sophocles, but actually the first line of
Euripides’ Meleager. Aristotle here equates a period with a line of verse; the line is
metrically complete but incomplete in thought. The next line, however, continued
without grammatical break, making the geography clear: “Alas, across the straits
facing pleasant plains, woe, woe!” Cf. Demetrius, On Style 58.
86. A colon (the visual image is that of the limbs of the body) is either a clause
or phrase that has some grammatical independence. A period may be made up of
either one or two cola; as section 7 will explain, if there are two they may be parallel
or contrasted.
87. The interpretation of Harris 1974.

1409b

216

On Rhetoric

prelude. This is the source of the parody [of Hesiod, Works and Days
265–266] by Democritus of Chios, attacking Melanippides on the
ground that he was composing preludes rather than antistrophes:
A man does wrong to himself when he does it to another,
And a long prelude is the worst thing for a composer.

1410a

Much the same applies to those who speak long cola, while those that are
too short do not constitute a period. Thus they drag the hearer headlong.
7. Lexis in cola is either divided or contrasted. It is divided in
this example: “Often have I admired those organizing panegyric
festivals/and those instituting athletic contests.” It is contrasted when
in each colon opposite lies with opposite or the same is yoked with its
opposites, for example, “They Helped both,/both those who stayed/
and those who followed; to the latter they provided more than they
had at home/and for the former they left enough behind.” Staying and
following are opposites, as are enough and more. [Another example
is] “And so both to those needing money/and those wishing to enjoy
it”; here enjoy is opposed to acquisition. And again, “It happens often
in these circumstances that the wise fail/and the foolish succeed”
[and] “Straightway they were thought worthy of meeds of valor/and
not much later they took command of the sea” [and] “To sail through
the land /and to march through the sea,/yoking the Hellespont/and
digging through Athos” [and] “And though citizens by nature,/by law
deprived of their city” [and] “Some of them miserably perished,/
and others were shamefully saved.” And [another is] “Privately to use
barbarian servants,/and collectively to overlook the many who were
enslaved,” [and] “. . . either while living to hold it/or when dead to
lose it.”88 And what someone said to Peitholaus and Lycophron89 in
the law court: “When these men were at home, they sold you, but
coming to you now they have bought you.” All these examples do
what has been said. 8. Such a style is pleasing because opposites
are most knowable and more knowable when put beside each other
and because they are like a syllogism, for refutation [elenkos] is a
bringing together of contraries.90
88. These quotations are all from Isocrates’ Panegyricus (sections 1, 35, 41, 48, 72,
89, 105, 149, 181, and 186, respectively), but apparently from memory, since they are
not very accurate. The most famous is the reference to Xerxes’ invasion of Greece in
480 b.c.e., when he built a bridge of rafts across the Hellespont and dug a canal for
his ships through the isthmus of Athos.
89. Assassins of Alexander of Pherai in 358 b.c.e. The text is uncertain but the
antithesis is clear.
90. Cf. what was said about the refutative enthymeme in 2.23.30.

BOOK 3, Chapter 9

217

n Up to this point in the chapter Aristotle has not used the word antithesis
(some translators insert it) even though some of the examples are clearly
antithetical, but now he speaks of antithesis as the sort of thing he is discussing. For his students and readers it was hardly a technical term, since its
meaning was clear from its two roots, as in op-position. Antithesis was one
of the characteristics of the prose style of Gorgias, and without mentioning
him Aristotle proceeds to discuss other examples of what have come to be
known as the “Gorgianic figures.”

9. Antithesis, then, is one thing, as is parisDsis if the cola are equal
[in the number of syllables] and paromoiDsis if each colon has similar extremities. This must occur either at the beginning or at the end
[of the colon]. At the beginning it always takes the form of [similar]
complete words, but at the end it may consist of [the same] final
syllables or [the same] grammatical form or the same word. At the
beginning are found such things as “Agron gar elaben argon par
autou” and “DJrHtoi t’epelontos pararrHtoi t’epeesin,”91 at an end
“DiBthBs an auton ou paidion tetokenai, all’ auton paidion gegonenai,”92 or “en pleistais de phrontisi kai en elakhistais elpisin,”93 and
inflexion of the same word: “axios de stathBnai khalkous, ouk axios
Dn khalkou?”94 and recurrence of the same word: “You spoke of him
in life meanly and now you write of him meanly”. [One also finds]
use of the same [concluding] syllable: “What would you have suffered so striking if you had seen the man shirking?” It is possible for
one example to have all these features—for the same [colon] to
be an antithesis, parison, and homoeoteleuton.95 10. The beginnings
of periods have mostly been enumerated in the Theodectea.96 There
are also false antitheses, for example, the one [the comic poet]
Epicharmus wrote,

91. “Land they took, unworked, from him,” probably from a lost comedy. “Ready
for gifts they were and ready for persuasion by words,” from Iliad 9.526.
92. “You would have thought him not to have begotten a child, but himself to have
become one,” source unknown.
93. “In greatest cases and in smallest hopes,” source unknown.
94. “Worthy of being set up in bronze but not worth a coin of bronze,” source
unknown.
95. Parison is another name for parisosis; homoeoteleuton is paromoiosis at the end
of cola.
96. Patillon 1997 sought to identify the Theodectea with chapters 1–28 of Rhetoric
for Alexander; in that case, the reference could be to the list of twofold statements in
chapter 24 of that work; but see further Appendix II.A ad fin.

1410b

218

On Rhetoric

Sometimes I was in their house, sometimes I was with them.
Chapter 10: Asteia, or Urbanities, and Pro Ommatdn Poiein,
or Bringing-Before-the Eyes, Visualization; with Further
Remarks on Metaphor
n Astu means “town,” usually in the physical rather than the political sense,
the latter being polis. In contrast to the country, towns often cultivate some
degree of sophistication; thus, asteia, “things of the town,” came to mean
good taste, wit, and elegant speech (see Schenkeveld 1994). Latin urbanitas
(from urbs, “city”), and thus English “urbanity,” have similar meanings; cf.
also “polite” from Greek polis (city state) and “civil” from Latin civis (citizen).

1. Since these things have been defined, there is need to say what are
the sources of urbanities [asteia] and well-liked expressions [eudokimounta]. Now it is possible to create them by natural talent or by
practice, but to show what they are belongs to this study. Let us say,
then, what they are and let us enumerate them thoroughly, and let the
following be our first principle [arkhB].
2. To learn easily is naturally pleasant to all people,97 and words
signify something, so whatever words create knowledge in us are
pleasurable. Now glosses are unintelligible, but we know words in
their prevailing meaning [kyria]. Metaphor most brings about learning; for when he98 calls old age “stubble,” he creates understanding
and knowledge through the genus, since old age and stubble are
[species of the genus of] things that have lost their bloom. 3. Now the
similes of the poets also do the same thing; and thus, if they do it well,
they seem urbane. (A simile is, as was said earlier, a metaphor differing by what is put first.99 Thus, it is less pleasing because longer and
because it does not say that this is that,100 nor does [the listener’s]
mind seek to understand this.)

97. Cf. the first sentence of the Metaphysics: “All human beings by nature desire
to know.” But note that here Aristotle emphasizes the pleasure coming from learning
easily; see section 4. As in the case of enthymemes (2.22.3), demands on a popular
audience should not be great.
98. Homer in Odyssey 4.213.
99. Prothesis; on the meaning of the word here, see Tamba-Mecz and Veyne 1979.
100. Aristotle, unlike later classical rhetoricians, thus implies that metaphor is a
form of predication, a major contention of Paul Ricoeur in The Rule of Metaphor
(1977).

BOOK 3, Chapter 10

219

4. Those things are necessarily urbane, both in composition and in
enthymemes, which create quick learning in our minds. This is why
superficial enthymemes are not popular (by superficial I mean those
that are altogether clear and which there is no need to ponder), nor
those which, when stated, are unintelligible, but those [are well-liked]
of which there is either immediate understanding when they are
spoken, even if that was not previously existing, or the thought follows soon after; for [then] some kind of learning takes place, but in
neither of the other cases. 5. In terms of the thought of what is said,
such kinds of enthymemes are well-liked; in terms of the composition
[an expression is urbane] on the one hand because of the figure, if
it is spoken with some contrast (for example, “regarding the peace
shared by others as a war against their own interests,”101 where peace
is opposed to war) 6. or on the other hand because of the words, if
they have metaphor—and metaphor that is not strange102 (for that
would be difficult to perceive) nor superficial (for that causes nothing
to be experienced). Furthermore, [urbanity is achieved] by means of
bringing-before-the-eyes [pro ommatDn poiein, “visualization”]; for
things should be seen as being done rather than as going to be done.103
[To achieve urbanity in style] one should thus aim at three things:
metaphor, antithesis, actualization [energeia].
7. Of the four kinds of metaphor,104 those by analogy are most
admired, as when Pericles said that the young manhood killed in the
war vanished from the city as though someone took the spring from
the year.105 And Leptines, speaking about the Lacedaimonians, [said]
that he would not allow [the Athenians] to stand by while Greece was
deprived of one of its “two eyes.” And when Chares was pressing to
101. Isocrates, Philippus 73, slightly misquoted. Philippus was completed in
346 b.c.e., and quotations from it here and elsewhere are the latest historical references
in Book 3.
102. Allotrios; but according to Poetics 21.7 (see Appendix I.G), every metaphor
is allotrios (alien).
103. Use of the present tense to describe future action; but the use of the “historic”
present to describe past action is commoner. Through the rest of the chapter Aristotle
uses bringing-before-the-eyes as a technical term. He will define it at the beginning of
chapter 11.
104. Genus to species, species to genus, species to species, or from analogy;
cf. Poetics 21.7 in Appendix I.G; Kirby 1997. In the traditional numbering, derived
from the Bipontine Edition, 3.10.7, consisting of a series of examples of visualization,
is the longest in the Rhetoric.
105. A simile, but Aristotle identifies simile as a form of metaphor. Quoted in
slightly different form in 1.7.34; see the note thereon.

1411a

220

On Rhetoric

submit his financial account in the Olynthian war for approval,106
Cephisodotus objected, saying he was trying to have his account
approved while “strangling the state at the throat.” And once, urging
on the Athenians when they had secured supplies for a compaign to
Euboea, he said they should march out “by the decree of Miltiades.”107
And Iphicrates, when the Athenians had made a truce with Epidaurus
and the neighboring coast, complained that they had deprived themselves of “traveling expenses” for the war. And Peitholaus called the
Paralus “the bludgeon of the people” and Sestus “the baker’s board
of the Peiraeus.”108 And Pericles demanded the removal of Aegina,
“the eyesore of the Piraeus.” And Moerocles said he was no more
wicked than—(naming someone of the upper class); for that person
was wicked “at thirty-three and a third percent interest” he himself
“at ten.” And Anaxandrides’ iambic line about the daughters who
were slow in marrying:
The maidens, I note, are in arrears in their marriages.

And [another example] is the remark of Polyeuctes against the
paralytic Speusippus, that he couldn’t keep quiet though “bound by
fate in a pillory of disease.” And Cephisodotus used to call warships
“colored millstones,” and [Diogenes] the Cynic called fast-food
shops “the Attic common mess.” Aesion, moreover, said they had
“poured” the city into Sicily;109 for this is a metaphor, and bringingbefore-the-eyes. And [his phrase] “so that Greece cried aloud” is in a
certain way metaphor, and a bringing-before-the-eyes. And [so is] the
way Cephisodotus demanded that they not hold many syndromas.110
And Isocrates [provides another example] in regard to “those running
together” in festivals.111 And [consider] what is found in the Funeral
106. Probably about 347 b.c.e., when Aristotle left Athens, a relatively late reference in this book.
107. I.e., without further planning and preparation, as Miltiades is supposed to have
decreed at the time of the Persian invasion in 490 b.c.e. Demosthenes (On the
Embassy 303) uses the phrase to mean a historical call to action against enemy threats.
108. The Paralus was the ceremonial ship of the Athenian state. The city of Sestus
had a strategic position on the trade route supplying grain from the Black Sea to the
port of Athens. Except for Pericles (fifth century b.c.e.), the politicians mentioned in
this section were older contemporaries of Aristotle whom he may have heard speak
when he was in Athens.
109. In 414 – 413 b.c.e.
110. “The running together of a mob,” a play on synklBtous, said of a meeting “duly
called.”
111. Philippus 12.

BOOK 3, Chapter 11

221

Oration, that “it was proper at the tomb” of those dying at Salamis for
Greece “to cut the hair in mourning, since freedom was being buried
with their valor.”112 If he had said it was proper to shed tears since
their valor was being buried, it would be a metaphor and beforethe-eyes, but the words “freedom with valor” provide an antithesis.
And when Iphicrates said, “My path of words is through the midst
of Chares’ actions,” it was a metaphor by analogy, and “through the
midst” is before-the-eyes. And to say, “Call dangers to the aid of
dangers” is before-the-eyes and metaphor. And [consider] Lycoleon
speaking on behalf of Chabrias: “not ashamed of his suppliant attitude in that bronze statue”; it was a metaphor at the time it was
spoken, but not at all times, but it was before-the-eyes,113 for when he
was in danger, the statue [seemed to] supplicate, the lifeless for the
living, the memorial of his deeds for the city. And [another example
is] “in every way practicing lowly thinking”;114 for “to practice” is to
increase something. And [another is] that “God kindled the mind as a
light in the soul”; for both make something clear. [Another is] “For
we do not settle ways, but postpone them”; both postponement and a
peace of this sort are [a species of] delaying. And to say that treaties
are a much better “trophy” than those won in wars;115 for a trophy
honors a moment and one success, while treatises apply to the whole
war; both are signs of a victory. And [another is] that cities give “great
financial account” in the censure of mankind; for a financial account
is a legal form of damages. Thus, that urbanities come from metaphor
by analogy and by bringing-before-the eyes has been explained.
Chapter 11: Continued Discussion of Bringing-Before-the Eyes;
Energeia, or Actualization; the Psychology of Metaphor and Its
Similarity to Philosophy; Proverbs; Hyperbole
n This chapter completes Aristotle’s discussion of devices of style that
defamiliarize language and explains how they do so. The explanation is
consistent with his cognitive psychology as found in other works, including

112. Lysias 2.60; but the reference there is to the Battle of Aegospotami
(405 b.c.e.), not to Salamis.
113. Lycoleon indicated the bronze statue of the kneeling Chabrias; although not
visible from the court, it would be familiar to the jurors. The statue commemorated
his ordering his troops to await the enemy on their knees.
114. Isocrates, Panegyricus 151.
115. Isocrates, Panegyricus 180.

1411b

222

On Rhetoric

Poetics and Nicomachean Ethics: the hearer “sees” something in a different
way and takes pleasure in learning. Though Aristotle has no concept of
“figures” of thought or speech, some of what he discusses here corresponds to, but did not directly influence, the discussion of figures in later
rhetorical treatises. Note the emphasis on the visual, which is characteristic
of Aristotle. Rather oddly, Paul Ricoeur has called the beginning of this
chapter “the most enigmatic passage of the Rhetoric” (see Ricoeur 1977:42
and 307–309).

1. But it is necessary to say what we mean by bringing-before-theeyes and what makes this occur. 2. I call those things “before-theeyes” that signify things engaged in activity. For example, to say that
a good man is “foursquare”116 is a metaphor, for both are “complete”;
but it does not signify activity [energeia].117 On the other hand, the
phrase “having his prime of life in full bloom”118 is energeia, as is
“you, like a free-ranging animal”119 and “now then the Greeks darting
forward on their feet.”120 Darting is actualization and metaphor; for
he means “quickly.” And [energeia], as Homer often uses it, is making the lifeless living through the metaphor. 3. In all his work he gains
his fame by creating activity, for example, in the following:
Then to the plain rolled the ruthless stone,121

1412a

and “the arrow flew” and [also of an arrow] “eager to fly” and [of
spears] “They stood in the ground longing to take their fill of flesh,”
and “The point sped eagerly through his breast.”122 In all of these
something seems living through being actualized; for being “ruthless” and “longing” and the other examples constitute energeia. He
applied these by using metaphor by analogy; for as the stone is to
116. Aristotle was probably thinking of the occurrence of this word (tetragDnos) in
a poem by Simonides of Ceos (frag. 5): “ ’Tis difficult for a man to be truly good,
foursquare in hands and feet and mind without incurring blame. . . .”
117. The English cognate is energy. As a rhetorical term energeia may be translated
“actualization” or “vivification.” It is sometimes, but not always, “personification”
and should be distinguished from enargeia, which means “clearness” or “distinctiveness”; see Eden 1986:71–75.
118. Isocrates, Philippus 10.
119. Isocrates, Philippus 127.
120. Euripides, Iphigenia at Aulis 80.
121. Odyssey 9.598.
122. The examples are from Iliad 13.587, 4.126, 9.574, and 15.541, respectively.
But some of what seems personification in early Greek may have been literally understood by an archaic audience, still sharing something of an animistic worldview.

BOOK 3, Chapter 11

223

Sisyphus, so is the “shameless” one to the one “shamefully treated”.
4. He does the same to lifeless things in his much admired similes:
Arched, foam-crested, some in front, but others upon others.123

He makes everything move and live, and energeia is motion.
5. As was said earlier, metaphors should be transferred from things
that are related but not obviously so, as in philosophy, too, it is characteristic of a well-directed mind to observe the likeness even in
things very different.124 Thus, Archytas [the Pythagorean philosopher] said that an arbiter and an altar were the same; for one who has
been wronged flies to both. Or if someone said that an anchor and a
rope hung from a hook are the same; for both are the same [shape],
but they differ in that one is hung from above and one from below.
And to say that [the allotments of land in] cities “have been equalized”125 is the same thing in widely differing cases: the equality is in
the surface of land and the powers [assigned to each citizen].
6. Urbanities in most cases come through metaphor and from an
added surprise; for it becomes clearer [to the listener] that he learned
something different from what he believed, and his mind seems to
say, “How true, and I was wrong.” The urbanity of epigrams derives
from their not meaning what is [literally] said; for example, that of
Stesichorus that “the cicadas will sing to themselves from the
ground.”126 Good riddles are pleasing for the same reason; for there is
learning, and they are spoken in metaphor, as is what Theodorus calls
ta kaina legein.127 But this occurs when there is a paradox and not, as
he says, in opposition to previous opinion; rather, it is like the bogus
word coinages in jests. Jibes involving change of a letter [i.e., puns]
also have this effect; for they are deceptive. It occurs too in verses,
when they do not end as the listener expected:128 “He came on,
having under his feet—blisters.” The listener expected sandals. [To
be effective,] the point should be clear as soon as the word is said.
Changes of letter [as in a pun] make the speaker mean not what he

123. Iliad 13.799, where it is part of a simile comparing battle to waves of the sea.
124. Cf. 2.20.7.
125. Perhaps a reference to Isocrates, Philippus 40.
126. Meaning that the land will be devastated; cf. 2.21.8 and Demetrius, On Style
99, who attributes the epigram to Dionysius of Syracuse.
127. “Saying new things.” The rhetorical handbook of Theodorus of Byzantium
was mentioned in 2.23.28 and by Plato in Phaedrus 266e6; cf. Appendix II.A.
128. This is technically known as paraprosodokia, “contrary to expectation.”

224

1412b

On Rhetoric

says but what the word plays on, like the remark of Theodorus129 to
Nikon the harpist, Thrattei se. He pretends to say, “It disturbs you”
and deceives, for he means something different. Thus it is pleasing to
the learner, but if the latter does not understand that Nikon was a
Thracian it will not seem urbane. And [consider] the remark Boulei
auton persai.130 7. It is necessary for both examples to be said in the
right way. Similarly also with urbanities, as in saying that the arkhB
[command] of the sea was not the arkhB [beginning] of misfortunes
for the Athenians; for they benefited; or as Isocrates says,131 that the
arkhB [empire] was the arkhB [beginning] of misfortunes; for in both
cases someone says what would not be expected and its truth is
recognized. To say that an arkhB is an arkhB is not very clever, but he
means the words in different senses; and [in the first example the
speaker] does not negate the arkhB he has spoken of but uses the word
in a different sense.
8. In all these cases, if a word is introduced appropriately, either as
a homonym or a metaphor, it is well done. For example, “Mr. Baring
is unbearable.”132 The homonym is negated, but appropriately if he
is unpleasant. And “You should be no stranger than a stranger,” or
no more than you should be. Or again, “It is not necessary for the
stranger always to be strange,” for one word [xenos] is used in different senses. Similar is the admired line of Anaxandrides: “Good it is to
die before doing anything worthy of death.” That is the same as saying someone is worthy of dying when not worthy of dying or worthy
of dying when not being worthy of death or not doing anything worthy of death. 9. The species of the lexis in these examples is the same,
but insofar as they are spoken concisely and with a contrast they are
better liked. The cause is that knowledge results more from contrast
but is quicker in brief form. 10. There should always be application
to the person addressed or [an awareness of] what is rightly said,
provided what is said is true and not superficial. It is possible to have
one quality [e.g., truth] without the other [without teaching something in brief, striking form]; for example, “One should die while
still faultless.” But that is not urbane. “A worthy man should marry a

129. Probably the actor mentioned in 3.2.4.
130. Literally, “you wish to destroy,” probably a pun on Persai, “Persian women.”
131. Philippus 61 and On the Peace 101 (the former from 346, the latter from
355 b.c.e.).
132. Lit. “Anáskhetus is unbearable [anaskhetós].

BOOK 3, Chapter 11

225

worthy woman.” But that is not urbane [either]. But it is [urbane] if
both [qualities] are present: “He is worthy to die when not worthy of
dying.” The more there is in the thought, the more it seems an
instance of urbanity; for example, if the words are a metaphor and a
metaphor of a certain sort and [if there is] antithesis and parisDsis133
and it has energeia.
11. As has been said above [3.4], similes, which are well liked in
some way, are also metaphors. They always involve two terms, as
does metaphor from analogy. For example, we say the shield is the
wine cup of Ares and his bow is a stringless lyre. Thus, their meaning is not that of the single word, as would be the case if we said the
bow is a lyre or the shield a cup. 12. People also make similes this
way; for example, a flute-player [can be] compared to an ape134 or a
near-sighted man to a lamp sprinkled with water; for both [eyelids
and flame] flicker. 13. This is well done when there is metaphor; for
it is possible to liken the shield to the cup of Ares and a ruin to the
“rag” of a house and to say that Niceratus is a “Philoctetes bound by
Pratys,” a simile made by Thrasymachus after seeing Niceratus
defeated by Pratys in a rhapsode contest, still disheveled and dirty
[like Philoctetes in Sophocles’ play]. If poets do not do this well, they
most fail with the public; and if they do it well, they are popular. I
mean when they make terms correspond: “He has legs like stringy
parsley” [or] “like Philammon boxing the punching ball.” All such
things are similes, and that similes are metaphors has been repeatedly
said.
14. Proverbs [paroimiai] are metaphors from species to species.
For example, if someone brings home something, believing it is a
good thing, and then suffers harm, it is “what the Carpathian says of
the hare,” for both have experienced what is described.135 So the
sources and cause of asteia have been more or less stated.
15. Well-liked hyperboles136 are also metaphors; for example, of a
man with a black eye, “You would have thought him a basket of
mulberries”; for his face is somewhat purple, but there is much
exaggeration. And in like this or that there is hyperbole differing in
the form of expression: “like Philammon boxing the punching ball”
133. Defined in 3.9.9 as equality in the length of cola.
134. While playing, the flute-player takes a stance like a crouching ape.
135. Meaning uncertain, but cf. the Australian experience with the introduction of
rabbits, which were originally thought to be useful but devastated crops.
136. Lit. “overshooting” the mark.

1413a

226

On Rhetoric

(you would think him to be Philammon fighting a sack), “He has
legs like stringy parsley” (you would think him to have parsley for
legs, so stringy they are). Hyperboles are adolescent; for they exhibit
vehemence.137 (Therefore those in anger mostly speak them:
Not even if he gave me as much as the sand and the dust . . .
But I will not marry the daughter of Agamemnon, son of Atreus,
Not even if she rivals golden Aphrodite in beauty,
And Athene in workmanship.)138
1413b

(The Attic orators especially use this.)139 Thus, it is inappropriate for
an older man to speak [in hyperbole].
Chapter 12: Oral and Written Style: Deliberative,
Judicial, and Epideictic Styles
n Aristotle does not make the distinction of the different “characters” or
levels of style—grand, middle, and plain—that are a feature of later Greek
and Latin rhetorical theory, but in this chapter he partly foreshadows that
development by looking at style in an overall sense of what is appropriate
for each of the three species of rhetoric as described in Book 1, and he also
considers the stylistic differences between written and oral compositions.
Before the end of the fifth century B.C.E. most oratory had been extempore
and not published in written form. Gorgias and other sophists began the
writing and publishing of epideictic speeches, and this was continued
by Isocrates. In judicial oratory, speech writers (logographers), of whom
Antiphon was probably the earliest and Lysias the most famous, had made
a profession for themselves by ghostwriting speeches for clients to memorize and deliver in court, and some of these speeches were published. By
Aristotle’s time, political orators, including Demosthenes, were publishing
written, polished versions of judicial and deliberative speeches they had
earlier delivered, seeking a longer lasting influence on the public.
Though writing had been introduced into Greece in the ninth century
B.C.E., “publication” in all genres long remained a matter of oral presentation. The period from the middle of the fifth to the middle of the fourth

137. The young overdo everything; cf. 2.12.4.
138. Iliad 9.385 and 388–389. Kassel (1976) double-bracketed the parenthesis as
a later addition by Aristotle.
139. Deleted by some editors. Hyperbole is certainly a regular feature of fourthcentury b.c.e. Greek oratory. If Aristotle added this sentence, he may not have been
in Athens at the time; thus, between 347 and 335 b.c.e. See note on 3.17.10.

BOOK 3, Chapter 12

227

centuries has been called the time of a “literate revolution,” comparable to
the changes brought in the fifteenth century by the introduction of printing
and in the twentieth century by the computer, for reliance on writing greatly
increased in this period and affected the composition and reception of texts
(see Havelock 1982; Ong 1982; and Kennedy 1998:191–195). Important
Greek texts dealing with the effect of writing include the end of Plato’s
Phaedrus, his Seventh Epistle (341c–342a), and the essay by Alcidamas, On
Those Writing Written Speeches (translations in Gagarin and Woodruff
1995; and Muir 2001). Written texts could be studied in detail in a way
impossible with purely oral publication, and Aristotle’s discussion of style
would not have been possible without them (see Graff 2001).

1. One should not forget that a different lexis is appropriate for each
genus [of rhetoric]. For the written and agonistic140 styles are not the
same; nor are the demegoric [deliberative] and the dicanic [ judicial],
and it is necessary to know both. [Debate] consists in knowing how
to speak good Greek; [writing] avoids the necessity of silence if one
wishes to communicate to others [who are not present], which is the
condition of those who do not know how to write. 2. Written style is
most exact; the agonistic style is very much a matter of delivery. Of
the latter there are two species; for one form is ethical, the other emotional. Thus, actors are on the lookout for plays of these sorts, and the
poets for these kinds of actors. But [poets] who write for the reading
public are [also] much liked, for example, Chaeremon (for he is as
precise as a professional prose writer [logographos]), and Licymnius
among the dithyrambic poets. On comparison, some written works
seem thin in debates, while some speeches of [successful] orators
seem amateurish when examined in written form. The cause is that
[their style] suits debate. Thus, things that are intended for delivery,
when delivery is absent, seem simple minded, since they are not
fulfilling their purpose; for example, asyndeta141 and constant repetition are rightly criticized in writing but not in speaking, and the
orators use them; for they lend themselves to oral delivery, 3. and it is
necessary to speak the same thought in different words; this, as it
were, leads the way for the delivery: “He is the one cheating you; he
is the one deceiving you; he is the one trying to betray you.” This is
the sort of thing Philemon the actor used to do in Old Man’s Madness
by Anaxandrides when reciting [the passage about] Rhadamanthus
140. A speech in an actual debate (agDn).
141. Absence of connective words.

228

1414a

On Rhetoric

and Palamedes and in the “ego” passage of The Pious Ones. For if one
does not act out these lines, it is a case of “the man carrying a
beam.”142 Similarly with asyndeta: “I came, I met, I was begging”; 4.
for it is necessary to act this out and not to speak it as one talking in
the same character and tone. Furthermore, asyndeta have a special
characteristic; many things seem to be said in an equal space of
time; for the connectives make many things seem one, so if they are
taken away, clearly the opposite results: one thing will be many.143
Asyndeton thus creates amplification [auxBsis]: “I came; I spoke; I
besought” (these things seem many), “he overlooked everything I
said.” This is Homer’s intention also in the passage “Nereus, again,
from Syme . . . Nereus, son of Aglaïa . . . Nereus who, as the handsomest man . . .”;144 for a man about whom many things are said must
necessarily often be named. [Conversely,] people think that if someone is often named there must also be many things to say; thus
[Homer] amplified [the importance of Nereus] (though mentioning
him only in this passage) and by this fallacy made him memorable,
though no account of him is given anywhere later in the poem.
5. Now the demegoric style seems altogether like shadowpainting;145 for the greater the crowd is, the further the distance of
view; thus, exactness is wasted work and the worse in both cases.
Speaking in the law courts requires more exactness of detail,146 and
that before a single judge even more; for it is least of all a matter of
rhetorical techniques; for what pertains to the subject and what is
irrelevant is more easily observed [by a single judge], and controversy is gone, so the judgment is clear. As a result, the same orators
are not successful in all these kinds of speeches.147 Where there is
most need of performance, the least exactness is present. This occurs
where the voice is important and especially a loud voice. The epideictic
142. Probably a proverb descriptive of awkwardness: the man walks stiffly to keep
the beam balanced.
143. As with metaphor, the listener learns something; see Blettner 1983.
144. Iliad 2.671–673.
145. Outline painting, without detail, intended to be seen at a distance and used for
background scenery in the theater; cf. Plato, Theaetetus 208e and Parmenides 165c.
146. As Cope pointed out ([1877] 1970) in his commentary on this passage,
Aristotle seems to confuse exactness of style—i.e., careful choice of words—with
detailed treatment of argument. It is the latter that is important in a court room, and
especially before a single judge, as in a tyranny.
147. Perhaps generally so, but conspicuous exceptions include Demosthenes,
Cicero, and some moderns.

BOOK 3, Chapter 13

229

style is most like writing; for its objective is to be read. And the judicial style second[-most].
6. To make a further distinction of style that it should be pleasant
and elevated is superfluous.148 For why that, rather than chaste or liberal or any other virtue of character? Clearly, the things discussed will
make the style pleasant if the virtue of lexis has been rightly defined.
For otherwise, what is the point of being clear and not flat but appropriate? For if it is luxuriant, it is not clear, nor if it is [too] concise. But
clearly the mean is suitable. And the things mentioned will make style
pleasant if they are well mingled: the conventional and the strange,
and rhythm, and persuasiveness from propriety. This concludes the
discussion of lexis, both in general about all of it and in particular
about each genus. It remains to speak about arrangement.

Chapters 13 –19: Taxis, or Arrangement
n Except in the case of some extempore oratory, inspired by an unexpected
opportunity, an effective speech should be well organized; that is, it should
consist of parts, each performing some function, but joined together into an
artistic unity; Plato had called for this in Phaedrus 246. How these parts
are arranged differs somewhat with the conventions of public address in
different societies, the occasion, the speaker’s perception of the audience’s
knowledge of the subject and attitude, and the speaker’s individual character and style. Speeches in the Homeric poems already illustrated some of the
structural patterns taught by later rhetoricians (see Martin 1989; Kennedy
1999:5–12). The first teachers of rhetoric in the Greek world seem to have
recommended following a set order of parts in a judicial speech, beginning
with an introduction to get the attention and good will of the audience,
followed by a narration of the facts in the case, a statement of the speaker’s
position with reasons why the jury should believe it, and a conclusion
summarizing the argument; some handbook writers exercised originality
in identifying additional parts. For details, see Appendix II.A.
Aristotle’s treatment of arrangement resembles his approach to invention at the beginning of Book 1149 in that he initially takes an austere, rather
Platonic, view of what, in an ideal society, should be adequate—facts and

148. This requirement is attributed to Theodectes by Quintilian (4.2.63).
149. See also his treatment of delivery in 3.1 as something regrettable, needed
because of the corruption of the audiences.

230

On Rhetoric

arguments—and he then turns to consider the actual situation of his time
and offers practical advice to his students. This probably reflects what he
perceived as the necessities in teaching a course on rhetoric to a general
audience in the Academy in the 350s B.C.E.; however, chapter 17, on the
proof has probably been rewritten at a later time. It contains a discussion of
enthymemes and a reference to Isocrates’ Philippus of 346 B.C.E.
The word taxis is common in military contexts and carries the connotation of the arrangement of troops for battle. Similarly, the speaker needs
to marshal the available means of persuasion for debate.

Chapter 13: The Necessary Parts of a Speech

1414b

1. There are two parts to a speech; for it is necessary [first] to state
the subject with which it is concerned and [then] to demonstrate the
argument. It is ineffective after stating something not to demonstrate
it and to demonstrate without a first statement; for one demonstrating,
demonstrates something, and one making a preliminary statement
says it first for the sake of demonstrating it. 2. Of these parts, the first
is the statement [prothesis], the other the proof [pistis], just as if
one made the distinction that one part is the problem, the other the
demonstration.150
3. Currently [writers on rhetoric] make ridiculous divisions; for a
diBgBsis [or narration of the facts] surely belongs only to a judicial
speech. How can there be the kind of narration they are talking
about in epideictic or deliberative? Or how can there be replies to the
opponent? Or an epilogue, in demonstrative speeches? Prooemion
[introduction] and antiparabolB [reply by comparison] and epanodos
[recapitulation] sometimes occur in public speeches when there is
debate on two sides of a question [for there is often both accusation
and response], but not insofar as there is deliberation.151 Moreover, an
epilogue is not a requirement of every judicial speech—for example,
if the speech is short or if the subject is easily remembered; for an
epilogue results from shortening [i.e., condensing] the length [of an
argument]. 4. The necessary parts, then, are prothesis [proposition]
and pistis [proof]. These are, therefore, the parts that really belong
[in every speech]; and at the most, prooemion, proposition, proof, and

150. As in geometry.
151. Deliberation (symboulB), the coming to an agreement. In actual Greek
speeches all these divisions can be found.

BOOK 3, Chapter 14

231

epilogue. For replies to the opposition belong to the proofs, and reply
by comparison is amplification of the same, so it is a part of the
proofs. One who does this demonstrates something, but the prooemion
does not, nor the epilogue; the latter reminds [the audience of what
has been demonstrated]. 5. If one continues making such divisions
as the followers of Theodorus152 make, there will be another diBgBsis,
both the epidiBgBsis [supplementary narration] and prodiBgBsis
[preliminary narration] and elenkos [refutation] and epexelenkos
[supplementary refutation], but one should attach a name only when
speaking of a distinct species and difference; otherwise, the category
becomes empty and laughable, like those Licymnius created in his
Art, [speaking of] “wafting” and “wandering” and “ramifications.”153
Chapter 14: The Prooimion, or Introduction
n Oimos literally means “stripe” or “layer” but metaphorically is used of the
“course” or “strain” of a song. A pro-oimion is thus a “prelude.” The word
first occurs in Pindar’s Nemean Odes 2.3. Transliterated into the Latin alphabet the word becomes prooemion or proemium, sometimes shortened in
English to proem. The Latin term is usually exordium, in which the image is
that of a warp set up on a loom for weaving. Other analogous words are
prologue, used primarily of plays, and preface, from Latin praefatio, “what
is said first,” used in the case of prose works other than oratory. Among the
works of Demosthenes is a collection of prooemia adaptable to a variety
of speeches.

1. The prooemion is the beginning of a speech, what a prologue is in
poetry and a proaulion in flute-playing; for all these are beginnings
and, as it were, pathmakers for one who is continuing on. Now the
proaulion is like the prooemion of epideictic speeches; for the fluteplayers, first playing whatever they play well, lead into the opening
note of the theme, and this is the way to write epideictic speeches:
after saying whatever one wants, to introduce the theme and join the
parts together, as all [epideictic writers] do. An example is the
prooemion of Isocrates’ Helen, where there is nothing in common

152. The rhetorician mentioned in 2.23.28 and 3.11.6; on his handbook, see
Appendix II.A.
153. Licymnius was a poet and may have applied these terms to dithyrambs or
other poetry rather than to oratory; cf. 3.2.13.

232

On Rhetoric

between the eristics and Helen.154 At the same time, even if [an
epideictic writer] wanders from the subject, it is appropriate for the
whole speech not to be uniform.
EPIDEICTIC PROOEMIA

1415a

2. The prooemia of epideictic speeches are drawn from praise or
blame. For example, in his Olympic Discourse Gorgias praises those
who founded national festivals: “You are worthy of the admiration of
many, O men of Greece.”155 Isocrates, on the other hand, blames them
because they honored excellence of the body with gifts, but offered
no prize to the wise (Panegyricus 1). 3. Another [source of epideictic
prooemia is] from offering advice: for example, that one should
praise the good, and thus the speaker praises Aristeides,156 or such
as are neither famous nor bad but are good while obscure, like
Alexander the son of Priam.157 [In these instances] the speaker offers
advice. 4. Another source is borrowed from judicial prooemia, that is,
from appeals to the audience, if the speech is about something paradoxical or difficult or already much discussed, in order to obtain
pardon [for discussing it], as the verse of Choerilus:158 “Now, when
[all the subjects of poetry] have been treated. . . .” These, then, are
the sources of the prooemia of epideictic speeches: from praise,
from blame, from exhortation, from dissuasion, from appeal to the
audience. The opening note must be either unrelated or related to [the
subject of the speech].

154. In the prooemion of the speech lsocrates attacks philosophers who argue for
the sake of argument (eristic) or sophists who speak on trivial subjects. In contrast, he
says, Gorgias chose a fine subject in his Encomium of Helen but then composed an
apology rather than an encomium. This leads into the body of the speech where
Isocrates shows how Helen should be celebrated.
155. Gorgias appeared at the Olympic games some time in the late fifth century
b.c.e. and gave a speech, perhaps as part of an oratorical contest. The theme, much
cultivated later by Isocrates, was need for concord among the Greeks. For what little
is known about the speech, see Sprague 1972:49–50.
156. See 2.23.7.
157. Not the best possible example, since he became notorious. The point is that
Paris was living alone in the country until chosen as a judge in the beauty contest of
the goddesses. Aristotle has mentioned a declamation about Alexander in 2.23.8,
2.24.7, and 2.24.9.
158. Fifth-century b.c.e. epic poet, complaining of the limited subjects left for
treatment by poets in his time.

BOOK 3, Chapter 14

233

JUDICIAL PROOEMIA

5. As for the prooemia of judicial speeches, one should grasp that they
have the same effect as the prologues of plays and the prooemia of
epic poems. (Those in dithyrambs are like those in epideictic. For
example: “Through you and your gifts and then spoils. . . .”)159 6. In
[judicial] speeches and in epic there is a sample of the argument in
order that [the audience] may know what the speech is about and
[their] thought not be left hanging. The unlimited leads astray; he who
gives, as it were, the beginning into the hand [of the hearer] allows
him, by holding on, to follow the speech. This is the reason for “Sing,
Goddess, the wrath . . .” [and] “Speak to me, Muse, of the man . . .”
[and]
Bring to me another theme, how from the land of Asia
There came to Europe a great war.160

And the tragedians make the subject of the play clear—if not right
away as Euripides does, at least somewhere in the prologue, as
Sophocles does too: “My father was Polybus. . . .”161 And the comedians similarly.
The most necessary and specific function of the prooemion is this:
to make clear what is the purpose for which the speech [is being
given]. As a result, if the subject is clear or short, there is no need
of a prooemion. 7. The other kinds that are used are remedies
[iatreumata] and are common [to all species of rhetoric]. These
are derived from the speaker and the hearer and the subject and the
opponent:162 from the speaker and the opponent whatever refutes or
creates a prejudicious attack [diabolB].163 But these are not done in

159. Attributed to the fifth-century b.c.e. dithyrambic poet Timotheus (frag. 18).
160. The quotations are, respectively, the first lines of the Iliad, the Odyssey, and
Choerilus of Samos’ epic on the Persian wars.
161. Oedipus the King 774; not indeed from the prologue of the play but from the
prologue of a long speech by Oedipus. Kassel (1976) double-bracketed the quotation
as a late addition by Aristotle.
162. These are the topics of prooemia as identified in many Greek and Roman
rhetorical treatises, e.g., Rhetoric for Herennius 1.8.
163. DiabolB, which recurs frequently in this chapter and the next, regularly means
“slander, prejudice” and is so rendered through this passage by most translators. The
cognate verb diaballD, however, which also occurs in the passage, means “attack,”
and Aristotle’s discussion does not draw a sharp distinction between attacks that may
be justified and those that are slanderous.

234

On Rhetoric

the same way. In the defendant’s speech replies to attack come first,
in the prosecution’s [they come] in the epilogue.164 The reason is not
unclear; for the defendant, when he is going to introduce himself, has
to remove whatever hinders his case and thus must first counteract the
attack. But the attacker ought to put his attack in the epilogue in order
that [the audience] may better remember it.
Remarks aimed at the audience derive from an effort to make
them well disposed or make them angry and sometimes to make them
attentive, or the opposite; for it is not always useful to make them
attentive, which is why many speakers try to induce laughter. All
sorts of things will lead the audience to receptivity if the speaker
wants, including his seeming to be a reasonable person. They pay
more attention to these people.
n Aristotle regards the remedial functions of the prooemion as two: to make
the audience well disposed [eunous] and attentive [prosektikos]. He then
speaks of receptivity [eumatheia], apparently regarding it as much the same
as attentiveness. Later Greek and Latin rhetorical works (e.g., Rhetoric for
Herennius 1.7) usually speak of three functions: to make the audience
receptive or teachable (Latin docilis), well disposed (benivolus), and attentive
(attentus).
1415b

And they are attentive to great things, things that concern themselves, marvels, and pleasures. As a result, one should imply that the
speech is concerned with such things. If they are not attentive, it is
because the subject is unimportant, means nothing to them personally, [or] is distressing. 8. But one should not forget that all such
things are outside the real argument: they are addressed to a hearer
who is morally weak and giving ear to what is extrinsic to the subject, since if he were not such a person, there would be no need of
a prooemion except for setting out the headings of the argument
in order that the body [of the speech] may have a “head.” 9. Furthermore, making the audience attentive is a feature common to all parts
of a speech, if there is need of it [at all]; for these remedies are sought
everywhere, not just when beginning. Thus, it is ridiculous to amass
them at the beginning, when all listeners are most paying attention.
As a result, whenever there is an opportunity, one should say [things
164. As in modern trials, the prosecution spoke first. The prosecutor, however,
sometimes begins with an explanation of why he has been moved to bring the case to
trial; cf. e.g., Lysias 12.1–3, Isocrates 17.1–2, Aeschines 1.1–2, etc.

BOOK 3, Chapter 14

235

like] “And give me your attention; for none of this pertains more to
me than to you,” and “I shall tell you something strange, the like of
which you have never heard,” or “[something] so marvelous.” To do
this is, as Prodicus165 said, “to throw in some of the fifty-drachma
lecture when the hearers nod.” 10. But it is clear that this is not
addressed to the hearer in his proper capacity as hearer; for all [who
do it] are attacking others or absolving themselves in their prooemia.
“Lord, I shall not speak as one in haste. . . .” “Why this proem
. . . ?”166 And [those do this] who have or seem to have a bad case
[where] it is better to spend words on anything other than the subject.
That is why slaves do not answer questions but go round in a circle
and “prooem-ize.”
11. The sources of creating good will have been mentioned and
each of the other similar [states of mind].167 But since it is well said,
Grant me to find among the Phaeacians friendship or compassion,168

these are the two things one should aim at. In epideictic, however, one
should make the hearer think he shares the praise, either himself or
his family or his way of life or at least something of the sort; for what
Socrates says in the funeral oration169 is true, that it is not difficult
to praise Athenians in Athens, but among the Spartans [it is another
matter].
DELIBERATIVE PROOEMIA

The prooemia of deliberative rhetoric are copied from those of judicial, but in the nature of the case there is very little need for them.
Moreover, they are concerned with what the audience knows, and the
subject needs no prooemion except because of the speaker or the
opponents170 or if the advice given is not of the significance they suppose, but either more or less. Then it is necessary to attack or absolve
165. Fifth-century b.c.e. sophist, best known from his role in Plato’s Protagoras
and his narration of the myth of “The Choice of Heracles” preserved in Xenophon’s
Memorabilia 2.1.21–34.
166. Sophocles, Antigone 223; Euripides, Iphigenia Among the Taurians 1162;
double-bracketed by Kassel (1976) as late additions by Aristotle.
167. See 2.1.7, 2.4, and 2.8. This is probably a later addition to the text.
168. Odyssey 7.327.
169. Plato, Menexenus 235d.
170. When the speaker needs to explain why he rises to speak or what his opponents’ hidden motives are; cf., e.g., Demosthenes 4.1.

236

1416a

On Rhetoric

and to amplify or minimize. It is for this that a prooemion is needed
—or for ornament, since the speech seems carelessly done if it does
not have one. An example of the latter is Gorgias’ encomium to
the Eleans: without preliminary sparring or warm-up171 he begins
abruptly, “Elis, happy city.”
Chapter 15: Ways of Meeting a Prejudicial Attack;
the Question at Issue
n This subject is a logical continuation of the discussion of meeting attacks
in the prooemion, but the strategies described may by applied anywhere in
a speech. Much of what Aristotle discusses was later absorbed into stasis
theory, the technique of determining the central question at issue in a trial
—whether it was one of fact (called conjectural stasis), law, quality (e.g.,
illegal but just), or jurisdiction of the court, with many subdivisions and variations. Stasis theory was also applied to deliberative and epideictic oratory,
though its primary function was in judicial speeches. The subject was first
organized systematically by Hermagoras of Temnos in the second century
B.C.E. and supplied the basis for inventional theory in the Rhetoric for
Herennius and the rhetorical works of Cicero. In the second century C.E. new
approaches were advanced, of which that found in On Stasis (or On Issues)
attributed to Hermogenes of Tarsus was the most influential (see Heath
1995). Aristotle touched on the subject in 1.13.9–10 and will return to it in
3.17.1, but perhaps because of his lack of personal experience in litigation,
he does not seem to have realized the rhetorical importance of determining
the question at issue at the outset of planning a prosecution or defense
(see Liu 1991). His lack of a systematic account of stasis is probably one
reason why the Rhetoric was rather little studied in rhetorical schools of
later antiquity.

1. One source of counteracting a prejudicial attack (diabolB)172 is to
use arguments to refute an unpleasant suspicion. It makes no difference whether someone has [actually] expressed the suspicion or not,
so this is of general applicability. 2. Another topic is to make denial
in regard to what is at issue: either that it is not true or not harmful or
not to this person or not so much as claimed or not unjust, or not very,
171. The metaphors are from boxing. Epideictic was often thought of as analogous
to athletic contests; cf. Isocrates, Panegyricus 1.
172. See note on this term in 3.14.7.

BOOK 3, Chapter 15

237

or not disgraceful or that it is not important. The question at issue
[amphisbBtBsis] concerns things like this, as in the reply of Iphicrates
to Nausicrates; for he admitted that he had done what the other
claimed and that it caused harm but not that he had committed a
crime.173 Or one may balance one thing against another when a wrong
has been done, [saying that] although it was harmful, it was honorable
[or that] though it caused pain, it was advantageous, or something
of this sort.
3. Another topic: that [the act in question] is a mistake or bad luck
or a necessity, as Sophocles said he was not trembling for the reason
his accuser said—in order to seem old—but out of necessity; for it
was not of his own volition that he was eighty years old.174 And it
is possible to offer a different reason: that one did not intend harm
but some other objective and not what the accuser alleged, but the
accidental result was harmful: “It would be just for you to hate me
if I acted in order to bring this about.”
4. Another [topic is recrimination], if the accuser has been
involved [in the action or something similar], either now or in the
past, either himself or one of those near him. 5. Another [is] if there
are others with similar characteristics whom [the opponents] agree
are not liable to the charge; for example, if a person who is fastidious
about his appearance is [to be judged] an adulterer, then so-and-so
must be. 6. Another [is] if the opponent or someone else has attacked
others [in the past] or if, without arraignment, others have been under
suspicion as the speaker now is and have been shown not guilty. 7.
Another comes from counterattacking the accuser; for it will be
strange if his words are believable when he himself is unbelievable.
8. Another if there has been a previous decision, as in Euripides’ reply
to Hygiainon in an antidosis trial when accused of impiety because he
had written a line recommending perjury: “My tongue swore, but my
mind was unsworn” (Hippolytus 612). He said [Hygiainon] was
wrong to bring trials into the law courts that belonged in the
Dionysiac contest; for he had given or would give an account of the
173. Iphicrates is the Athenian general often mentioned earlier; Nausicrates (called
Naucrates by Roman writers) was a student of Isocrates; see Quintilian 3.6.3.
174. The reference is perhaps to Sophocles the dramatist, when accused by his son
of mental incompetence as described in an anonymous biography prefixed to some
manuscripts; otherwise the fifth-century b.c.e. general Sophocles whose trial Aristotle
mentions in 1.14.3 and 3.18.6.

238

1416b

On Rhetoric

words there if anyone wanted to bring a complaint.175 9. Another is to
use [the nature of] slander [diabolB] as a basis of attack, considering
what a bad thing it is, and this because it alters legal judgments and
does not rely on the facts. To speak of symbola176 is a topic common
to both sides; for example, in the Teucer [of Sophocles] Odysseus
claims Teucer is a relative of Priam, for his mother Hesione was
[Priam’s] sister, but Teucer says that his father Telamon was Priam’s
enemy and that he had not betrayed the spies. 10. Another, for the
accuser, is to find fault with some big thing briefly after praising some
little thing at length or, after setting forth many good things [about the
opponent] to find fault with the one thing that bears on the case.177
Such [speakers] are most artful and most unjust; for they seek to harm
by saying good things, mingling them with the bad. [A topic] common to accuser and defendant [occurs] when the same thing can have
been done for many reasons; the accuser should attribute an evil
motive, pointing to the worse interpretation, the defendant the better
[motive]. For example, when Diomedes picked Odysseus [as a companion on an expedition in Iliad 10.242– 46] one [speaker] might say
that he regarded him as the best man, another, no, [he regarded him]
as worthless, chosen because he alone would not be a rival.178 Let this
be enough about prejudicial attack.
Chapter 16: The Dibgbsis, or Narration, and the Use of Narrative
n DiVgVsis literally means “a leading through” the facts. It has become usual
to distinguish narration as a part of a speech from narrative, meaning any
account of a course of events, but Greek diVgVsis (and Latin narratio)
were sometimes used of both. Conversely, Greek diVgVma, “narrative,” was

175. The trilogy of which the Hippolytus was a part had been given first prize by
the judges in the dramatic contest of 428 b.c.e., and Euripides was claiming a charge
of impiety should be brought before those judges. This is an example of what comes
to be known as stasis of transference or jurisdiction, the claim that the charge is
brought before the wrong court.
176. Often physical evidence, but here a probable sign: the assumption of family
loyalty as contrasted with evidence from actions. Teucer was accused of treachery to
the Greeks.
177. As Antony does in regard to Brutus in his funeral oration for Caesar in
Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar. That Brutus was an “honorable man” is repeatedly
stated, but he is “ambitious.”
178. As in the Ajax of Theodectes; see 2.23.20.

BOOK 3, Chapter 16

239

sometimes used of the narration of a speech, and in the second century C.E.
katastasis became the common Greek word for a narration.
EPIDEICTIC NARRATIVE

1. DiBgBsis in epideictic speeches is not continuous but part-by-part,179
for one should go through the actions that constitute the argument
[logos]. The argument is composed partly from what is non-artistic,
since the speaker is in no way the cause of the actions, and partly from
art, which is a matter of showing either that the action took place, if
it seems unbelievable, or that it was of a certain kind or importance
or all these things. 2. For this reason, sometimes everything should
not be narrated continuously, because this kind of demonstration is
hard to remember. From some actions a man is shown to be brave,
from others wise or just. A speech so arranged is simpler; the other
approach180 is confusing [poikilos] and not plain [litos]. 3. Wellknown actions should [only] be recalled, [not described in detail].
Thus, many [epideictic speeches] have no need of narrative, for
example, if you wish to praise Achilles; for all know of his actions.
But it is necessary to make use of these. On the other hand, if you are
praising Critias, you should [narrate his good actions] for not many
know of them. . . .181
JUDICIAL NARRATIVE

4. But nowadays they182 ridiculously say that the narration should be
rapid [taxeia]. Yet, as the man said to the baker when asked whether
he should knead the dough hard or soft, “What? Can’t it be done
right?” Similarly here, one should not narrate at length, just as one
should not [unduly] lengthen prooemia, nor proofs either; for speaking well is not a matter of rapidity or conciseness but of moderation,
179. In judicial oratory narrative is largely confined to a continuous statement of
the facts of the case and necessary background information. In epideictic, as Aristotle
understands it, the speaker may identify the virtues of the person being praised
one-by-one and add narrative passages in support of them.
180. I.e., a single narrative to which references are made later in the speech.
181. Critias was one of the Thirty Tyrants in Athens in 404 b.c.e. Something seems
to have been lost in the text here; in what follows Aristotle is discussing narrative in
judicial speeches. The manuscripts fill the gap by inserting a passage from 1.9.33 –37;
see note thereon.
182. Writers of handbooks and, perhaps, Isocrates and his followers.

240

1417a

On Rhetoric

and that means saying just as much as will make the thing clear or
as much as will make [the audience] suppose that something has
happened or that harm has been done or injustice, or that the facts are
as important as you claim. 5. [As] the opposing speaker, [you] should
do the opposite: seize an opportunity in the narration to mention
whatever bears on your own virtue (for example, “By stressing
justice, I kept admonishing him not to abandon his children”) or bears
on the opponent’s wickedness (“But he answered me that wherever
he might be there will be other children,” which is what according
to Herodotus183 the Egyptian rebels replied [when begged by
Psammetichus not to desert their wives and children]) or what is
pleasing to the judges.
6. The defendant’s narration can be shorter; for what is in doubt is
whether something happened or whether it was harmful or unjust or
not important, so one should not waste time on what is agreed unless
something contributes to the defense; for example, if something has
been done but not that it was unjust. 7. Further, actions should be
spoken of in past tenses except for what brings in either pity or indignation when it is dramatized. The account of [what was told to]
Alcinous is an example, in that it has been compressed into sixty
verses for Penelope,184 and [other examples] are the way Phaÿllus
told the epic cycle and the prologue of the Oeneus.185
8. The narration ought to be indicative of character [BthikB]. This
will be so if we know what makes for character [Bthos]. One way,
certainly, is to make deliberate choice [proairesis] clear: what the
character is on the basis of what sort of choice [has been made]. And
choice is what it is because of the end aimed at. Mathematical works
do not have moral character because they do not show deliberate
choice (for they do not have purpose), but the Socratic dialogues
do (for they speak of such things). 9. Other ethical indications are
attributes of each character; for example, that someone walks away
while talking; for this makes his arrogance and rudeness of character
clear. And do not speak from calculation, as they do nowadays, but
183. Histories 2.30.
184. The story told to Alcinous includes Odysseus’ dramatic narration of his
adventures, with much direct discourse, and stretches through Odyssey 9–12. In
Odyssey 23.264 –284 and 310–343 (not quite sixty verses) Odysseus gives Penelope
a summary of his adventures.
185. Nothing is known of Phaÿllus; the Oeneus was a tragedy by Euripides, now
lost.

BOOK 3, Chapter 16

241

from moral principle: “I desired it and I chose this for that reason, but
if I did not benefit, it was better so.” The former is characteristic of a
prudent man, the latter of a good one; for the quality of a prudent
man consists in pursuing his own advantage, that of a good man in
pursuing the honorable. If [what you say] seems incredible, then add
the cause, as Sophocles does. An example is the passage from the
Antigone, arguing that there is more obligation to a brother than to
husband or children; for the latter can be replaced if they die,
But when mother and father have gone to Hades
There is no brother who can be born again.186

If you do not have a reason to give, say that you are not unaware that
what you say may seem incredible but [that] you are naturally this
sort of [virtuous] person and [that] people never do believe [that] anyone willingly does anything except for some advantage. 10. Further,
speak from the emotions, narrating both the results [of emotion] and
things the audience knows and what are special characteristics of the
speaker or the opponents: “And he went off, scowling at me.” And
as Aeschines says of Cratylus,187 that he was hissing and violently
shaking his hands; for these things are persuasive since they are indications [symbola] that the audience knows of those things they do not
know. Many such things are to be found in Homer:
Thus she spoke, and the old nurse covered her face with her hands.188

For those who begin to cry place their hands over their eyes. And at
the beginning you should introduce yourself—and the opponent—as
a person of a certain character so that they will see you as such, but
do it inconspicuously. That this is easy can be seen from messengers
[in tragedy]; for we know nothing of what they are going to say, but
we get some inkling of it [from their attitude]. Narrative should occur
in many places and sometimes not at the beginning.

186. Sophocles, Antigone 911–912, with minor textual difference. The argument
has been difficult for some modern critics to accept as something Sophocles would
have written, but Aristotle’s citation is evidence that it is genuine, and there is other
evidence as well.
187. Aeschines here is not the orator but Aeschines called “Socraticus,” contemporary of Plato, devoted follower of Socrates, and author of dialogues. Cratylus was
a follower of Heraclitus and engages in debate with Socrates in Plato’s dialogue
Cratylus.
188. Odyssey 19.361.

1417b

242

On Rhetoric
DELIBERATIVE NARRATIVE

11. Narrative is least common in deliberative oratory, because no one
narrates future events, but if there is narrative, it will be of events in
the past, in order that by being reminded of those things the audience
will take better counsel about what is to come (either criticizing
or praising).189 But then the speaker does not perform the function of
an adviser. If something is unbelievable, promise to tell the cause
of it immediately and to refer it to whomever they wish, as Iocasta
in the Oedipus of Carcinus is always promising when someone is
trying to find out about her son. And [similarly] Haemon in
Sophocles.190
Chapter 17: The Pistis, or Proof, as Part of an Oration
n This somewhat rambling chapter begins with discussion of proofs in judicial oratory, turns to epideictic and deliberative speeches and the differences
among the species, returns to epideictic, comments on refutation, and ends
with further remarks on the presentation of character. Aristotle seems in
sections 5–9 and 12–17 to have revised and expanded the original text
of his “afternoon” lectures by discussion of paradigms, enthymemes, and
maxims which he had discussed in Book 2, chapters 20–22, at a late stage
in the development of the text.

1. Proofs should be demonstrative [i.e., logically valid]. Since four
points may be open to dispute [amphisbBtBsis],191 there is need to provide a demonstration bearing on what is disputed: for example, if the
issue disputed in a trial involves a denial that something was done,
there is most need to provide a demonstration that it was, and if [the
act is admitted but one party alleges] that it did no harm, [the other
needs to show] that it did; and if [it is denied] that it was important or
[claimed] that it was done justly, similarly. And if the dispute is about
whether something has been done [by one of the parties], 2. do not
forget that it is necessary on this issue alone for one or the other to be
a liar; for ignorance is not an excuse, as it might be if the dispute were

189. Double-bracketed by Kassel (1976) as one of Aristotle’s late additions.
190. Antigone 683–723. Apparently Aristotle thought Haemon’s loyalty to his
father was unlikely.
191. Aristotle here again anticipates some categories of later stasis theory. His four
questions are fact, harm, importance, and justice, of which the last three become subdivisions of stasis of quality.

BOOK 3, Chapter 17

243

about justice.192 So in this case one should use [the topic of the opponent’s wickedness], but not in others.
3. In epideictic speeches there will be much amplification about
what is good and advantageous; for the facts need to be taken on trust,
and speakers rarely introduce evidence of them, only if any are
incredible or if someone else is held responsible.
4. In deliberative speeches one may debate whether the events predicted [by a previous speaker] will occur or admit that they will occur
as he demands, but [claim they] will not be just or advantageous or
important. One should also look to see if any incidental details are
falsified; for these are sure signs [tekmBria] that he also falsifies other
things more to the point.193 5. Paradigms [i.e., proof from examples]
are most appropriate to deliberative oratory, enthymemes more suited
to judicial; for the former is concerned with the future, so it is necessary to draw examples from the past; the latter is concerned with what
are or are not the facts, which are more open to demonstration and a
necessary conclusion; for the past has a necessity about it. 6. But the
enthymemes should be mixed in and not spoken continuously; otherwise they get in each other’s way. (There is a limit to how much an
audience can take, [as in the line]
Oh friend, since you have spoken as much as a wise man would194

as much as, not such things as.) 7. And do not seek enthymemes
about everything; otherwise you do what some philosophers do; the
conclusions of their syllogisms are better known and more plausible
than their premises. 8. And when you would create pathos, do not
speak enthymemes; for the enthymeme either “knocks out” the
pathos or is spoken in vain. (Simultaneous movements knock out
each other and either fade away or make each other weak.) Nor
should you seek an enthymeme when the speech is being “ethical”;
for logical demonstration has neither Bthos nor moral purpose.195
192. In Nicomachean Ethics 5.10.1135b30 Aristotle somewhat qualifies this: if a
speaker denies an action that he has performed because he has genuinely forgotten it,
he is not necessarily wicked. But generally, when one person claims something was
done and another denies it, one is lying.
193. This hardly meets the standards of tekmBria as discussed in 1.2.16, which may
have been a later development in Aristotle’s terminology.
194. Odyssey 4.204.
195. The rejection of enthymemes as too coolly rational in arousing emotion or
portraying character (modified in section 12) is evidence against the view of Grimaldi
and others that Aristotle’s discussion of emotions and characters in Book 2 is intended
to supply topics for enthymemes; see Wisse 1989:24–25.

1418a

244

On Rhetoric

9. Maxims should be used both in a narration and in a proof; for they
are ethical: “I have given [the money], though knowing ‘one should
not trust.’ ”196 Or [they should be used] if the context is emotional:
“Though wronged, I have no regret; the profit belongs to him, the
justice to me.”197
10. Speaking in a deliberative assembly is more difficult than in a
law court, as one would expect, since it is concerned with the future,
the other with the past, which is known already, “even to prophets,”
as Epimenides the Cretan said (he used not to prophesy about the
future but about things in the past that were unclear); and the law is
a hypothesis in judicial cases: having a starting point, it is easier for
one to find proof. And [deliberative oratory] does not have many
opportunities for diatribes, for example, against the opponent or
about oneself or to create pathos.198 Least of all [species of rhetoric
can deliberative do this], unless one digresses. Therefore, one should
do this [only] when at a loss for something to say, as do the orators at
Athens and Isocrates;199 for even when giving advice, he uses invective, for example, against the Lacedaimonians in the Panegyricus and
against Chares in the Symmachicus.200
11. In epideictic one should interweave the speech with praise, as
Isocrates does; for he is always bringing in somebody [to praise].
What Gorgias used to say—that he was never at a loss for words—is
similar: if he is talking about Achilles, he praises [his father] Peleus,
then [his grandfather] Aeacus, then the god [Aeacus’ father, Zeus];
similarly, with courage, that it does this and that or has certain
qualities [that can be amplified]. 12. If one has logical arguments,
one should speak both ethically and logically; if you do not have
196. The situation is that of a man who has deposited money with another.
197. Despite what Aristotle has just said, this seems to qualify as an enthymeme
since a reason is given.
198. DiatribB literally means “spending time” on some subject, but came to mean
a personal attack. To illustrate Aristotle’s point, compare the general absence of
personal invective against his Athenian opponents in Demosthenes’ deliberative
speeches with his extended invective in judicial speeches, including On the Crown.
In Hellenistic philosophical schools a diatribe was an informal personal speech,
sometimes like a sermon, addressed by a teacher to his students, often in response to
questions.
199. On orators at Athens, see note on 3.11.15. Isocrates, though an Athenian, did
not speak in public, which may be why he is mentioned separately.
200. Aristotle regarded the Panegyricus as a deliberative speech since it gave
advice on the need of the Greeks to join together under Athenian leadership against
Persia; because of its extensive praise of Athens it is often classified as epideictic. The
Symmachicus is better known as On the Peace.

BOOK 3, Chapter 17

245

enthymemes, speak ethically. And to seem virtuous suits a good person
more than an exact argument does. 13. Refutative enthymemes are
better liked [by audiences] than demonstrative ones because what
makes a refutation is more clearly syllogistic; for inconsistencies are
clearer when placed side-by-side. 14. Refutations of the opponent are
not a separate species but belong to proofs.201 Some disprove by
objection [to a premise or conclusion], some by [a counter-]syllogism.202 In both deliberation and in court the opening speaker should
state his own premises first, then should meet those of his opponent
by disproving and tearing them to pieces before he can make them.203
But if the opposition has many good points to make, put the refutations first, as Callistratus did in the Messenian assembly; for first
removing the objections they were going to voice, he then spoke
his own case.204 15. But if you speak second you should reply first
to the opposing speech, refuting and offering opposed syllogisms,
especially if what was said seems to have met with approval. Just
as the mind is not receptive toward a person who has been previously
criticized, in the same way it is not [receptive] toward a speech if
the opponent seems to have spoken well. One should thus make
room in the hearer’s mind for the speech one is going to give, and
this will happen if you take away [the impression that has been left].
Thus, after fighting against everything or the most important things
or the popular things or the easily refutable things, one should then
make one’s persuasive points:
First shall I be a defender of the goddesses,
And shall show she does not speak justly.
For I do not think that Hera. . . .205
201. Cf. 2.26.3. Aristotle does not regard the refutation as a distinct part of an
oration, as did Theodorus (cf. 3.13.5), but later writers often so list it; cf., e.g.,
Rhetoric for Herennius 1.4. In Rhetoric for Alexander, chapters 7 and 13, refutation
is one of several subheadings of proof.
202. Cf. 2.25.1.
203. In an Athenian court the speakers would have known most of the arguments
of their opponents from the preliminary hearing.
204. On an embassy to the Messenians in 362 b.c.e. Callistratus began with reasons
why they should not ally with Thebes before introducing arguments why they should
join with Athens (see Nepos, Epaminondas 6). When an orator confronts a hostile
audience it is often most effective to face immediately the arguments or prejudices in
their minds. Cicero’s speech For Cluentius is a large-scale example.
205. Euripides, Trojan Women 969–1032, where Hecuba begins her reply to Helen
by defending the action of the goddess (Aphrodite) in the judgment of Paris. She is
Helen.

1418b

246

On Rhetoric

In these lines [Hecuba] seizes first on [Helen’s] most foolish argument. So much for arguments [pisteis].
16. In regard to ethos, since there are sometimes things to be
said about oneself that are invidious or prolix or contradictory, and
about another that are abusive or boorish, it is best to attribute them
to another person, as Isocrates does in the Philippus and in the
Antidosis206 and as Archilochus does in censure; for he introduces
the father speaking of his daughter in an iambic poem: “Nothing is
unexpected nor declared impossible on oath”207 and [introduces] Charon
the carpenter in [another] iambic work, which begins “Nothing to me
the [wealth of] Gyges.” And as Sophocles does, making Haemon
speak to his father about Antigone on the basis of what others say.208
17. Sometimes it is advisable to change enthymemes into maxims; for
example: “Sensible men should seek reconciliations when successful;
for thus they get the greater advantage.” As an enthymeme this would
be “If it is necessary to seek reconciliations whenever such changes
are most profitable and most advantageous, then it is necessary to
seek changes when one is successful.”209
Chapter 18: Erdtbsis, or Interrogation
n In Athenian judicial procedure indictment resulted from a preliminary
hearing before one of the archons, or magistrates, at which some prima
facie evidence of a wrong was presented and witnesses offered testimony.
It is likely that the defendant could interrogate the witnesses and try to show
that there was no merit in the charge. The evidence of the witnesses was
taken down in writing and then read out by a court secretary if a trial took
place. (On judicial procedures in Athens, see Bonner and Smith 1930–1938.)
Interrogation was also used in auditing officials on the completion of a term
in office. Though the prosecution and defense in trials often discuss the
evidence of witnesses, there was no cross-examination of them there in
the modern sense. The principals in the trial could, however, ask questions
206. Philippus 4 –7 and Antidosis 132–139 and 141–149 attribute flattering
remarks to Isocrates’ friends.
207. Archilochus, sixth-century b.c.e. poet, when disappointed in love for Neobule,
attributed opprobrious remarks about her to her father in a passage beginning with this
line.
208. Antigone 689–700.
209. In syllogistic form, if A = B when B = C, then A, since B = C. The maxim cited
here, however, fulfills the requirements of an enthymeme as given in 2.21.2, since it
already has a supporting reason.

BOOK 3, Chapter 18

247

directly of each other and demand an answer, which is principally what
Aristotle here discusses; examples of the procedure can be found in Plato’s
Apology (24c–27d), Lysias’ speech Against Eratosthenes (12.25), and elsewhere, but rhetorical questions, not expecting an answer, are far more common. Chapter 5 of Rhetoric for Alexander discusses investigational oratory
(exetasis) and has some similarities to Aristotle’s chapter but does not mention the possibility of replies. ErXtVsis did not become a distinct part of
rhetoric nor is investigation a species of oratory in the standard teaching of
Greek and Roman rhetoricians (for further discussion, see Carawan 1983).

1. As for interrogation (erDtBsis), it is most opportune to use it when
an opponent has said one thing and, if the right question is asked an
absurdity results. For example, Pericles questioned Lampon about
the holy rites of the Savior Goddess. When he replied that it was not
permitted for an uninitiated person to hear about them, Pericles asked
if he knew them himself. Since he admitted he did, [the next question
was,] “And how, since you are uninitiated?” 2. A second situation is
when something is self-evident and it is clear to the questioner that
the opponent will grant another point. Receiving the expected answer
to this, one should not ask about what is self-evident but should state
the conclusion to which it points, as Socrates did when Meletus
denied that Socrates believed in the gods. He asked if daimones
[“spirits,” in which Meletus admitted Socrates believed] were not
either children of gods or something divine, and when Meletus said
“They are,” Socrates asked, “Does anybody think there are children
of gods but not gods?”210 3. Another situation is when [the speaker]
intends to show that [the opponent] is contradicting himself or saying
something paradoxical. 4. And a fourth when it is not possible to
answer the question except sophistically; for if he answers that it is
and isn’t or “Some yes, some no” or “In a way, but in another way
not,” [the audience] calls out that he is at a loss. Otherwise, do not
attempt interrogation; for if the opponent resists, you seem to be
defeated; for it is not possible to ask a series of questions because of
the weakness of the audience. (For the same reason one should
condense enthymemes as much as possible.)211
210. The exchange is incorporated in Plato’s Apology 27d, which Aristotle apparently regarded as a faithful record of what Socrates said, at least in this case. The
conclusion is a rhetorical question, addressed to the jury.
211. Cf 1.2.13, where it is said that a general audience cannot follow an extended
argument.

1419a

248

1419b

On Rhetoric

5. Amphibolies212 need to be answered by examining them logically
and in some detail, supplying a resolution of seeming contradictions
directly in the answer before [the opponent] asks a follow-up question or draws a conclusion; for it is not difficult to see to what the train
of argument may lead. Let how to do this and how to make replies be
evident from the Topics [book 8]. 6. If a conclusion takes the form of
a question, explain the reason for the conclusion; for example, when
Sophocles213 was asked by Pisander if he had approved establishing
the government of the Four Hundred, as the others on the committee
to draft legislation did, he admitted it. “But why? Did these measures
not seem to you to be wicked?” He agreed. “Did you not then do these
wicked deeds?” “Yes,” he said, “but there were no better alternatives!”214
And as the Spartan replied, when rendering an account of his term as
ephor: being asked if it did not seem to him that the others on the
board had justly been put to death, he agreed. The examiner asked,
“Did not you take the same measures as they?” He admitted it.
“Therefore would it not be just to put you also to death?” “Not at all,”
he replied, “for they took bribes to do these things; I did not, but acted
in accordance with my own judgment.” Thus, one should not ask any
further question after drawing a conclusion nor couch the conclusion
as a question unless the balance of truth is in one’s favor.
7. As for humor, since it seems to have some use in debate and
Gorgias rightly said that one should spoil the opponents’ seriousness
with laughter and their laughter with seriousness, the number of
forms of humor have been stated in the Poetics,215 of which some are
appropriate for a gentleman to use and some not. Each speaker will
take up what suits him. Mockery [eirDneia] is more gentlemanly than
buffoonery [bDmolokhia]; for the mocker makes a joke for his own
amusement, the buffoon for the amusement of others.
Chapter 19: The Epilogos, or Conclusion of a Speech
n Epilogos simply means a logos that is added on (epi). The Latin is peroratio.
Note the references in this chapter to a “natural order” in the arrangement

212. See note on 3.5.4. Here an amphiboly is an ambiguous statement, or question
that cannot be answered in the terms asked. A notorious modern instance is “Have you
stopped beating your wife yet?”
213. The orator involved in the oligarchic revolution of 411 b.c.e., not the dramatist.
214. Cf. Lysias, Against the Grain Dealers, sec. 5, in Appendix I.C.
215. In the lost second book. This section is probably a late addition to the chapter.

BOOK 3, Chapter 19

249

of the material. In contrast to the previous chapters, the discussion does not
consider epilogues in each of the three species of rhetoric. What Aristotle
says here is chiefly applicable to judicial rhetoric, but could be applied in an
extended deliberative speech where the audience needs a recapitulation of
the arguments.

1. The epilogue is made up of four things: disposing the hearer favorably toward the speaker and unfavorably toward the opponent; amplifying and minimizing; moving the hearer into emotional reactions
[pathB]; and [giving] a reminder [of the chief points in the argument].
After he has shown himself to be truthful and his opponent false, the
natural thing is [for a speaker] to praise and blame and drive home the
point. One should aim at showing one or the other of two things:
either that the speaker is a good man in terms of the issues or that he
is good generally; or either that the opponent is a bad man in terms of
the issues or that he is bad generally. The topics from which such
characterizations are derived have been discussed [in Book 1, chapter 9]. 2. After this, in natural order, is the amplification or diminution
[of the importance] of what has already been shown [in the proof];
for what has been done should be agreed upon before talking about
its importance. Similarly, the growth of bodies comes from the preexistent.216 The topics which should be used for amplification and
diminution have previously been laid out.217 3. After this, when the
nature and importance [of the facts] are clear, lead the hearer into
emotional reactions. These are pity and indignation and anger and
hatred and envy and emulation and strife. Their topics have also been
mentioned earlier.218 What remains, then, is to remind the audience of
what has been said earlier. 4. This may be fittingly done in the way
that [writers of rhetorical handbooks] wrongly speak in discussing
prooemia. They require that points be made several times in order to
be easily learned. In the prooemion it is right to identify the subject,
in order that the question to be judged not escape notice, but in the
epilogue one should speak in recapitulation of what has been shown.
216. Aristotle regarded politics, poetry, rhetoric, etc. as developing analogously
with biological organisms; their matter and form have potential to be actualized.
217. Presumably the reference is to 2.19, though to call them “topics” here confuses the distinction otherwise maintained between that term and koina.
218. In Book 2, chs. 2–11, but neither topic nor any other rhetorical term is used of
the propositions set out there. This cross-reference is probably a later addition by
Aristotle.

250

1420a

1420b

On Rhetoric

The starting point [of the epilogue] is to claim that one has
performed what was promised, 5. so there should be mention of
what these things are and why. The discussion is [sometimes] derived
from comparison with the case of the opponent. Compare what both
have said on the same subject: “But he says this about that, while I say
this and for these reasons.” Or use mockery: “He says this, I that.
And what would he have done if he had shown this but not that?” Or
use interrogation:219 “What has not been shown?” or “What did he
show?” Either do this by comparison or in the natural order as the
statements were made, first one’s own and again, if you want it,
the opponent’s claim separately. 6. Asyndeton is appropriate for the
end of the discourse, since this is an epi-logos, not a logos: “I have
spoken; you have listened, you have [the case], you judge.”220
219. Here meaning rhetorical question, not expecting a reply.
220. Cf. the end of Lysias, Against Eratosthenes (12.100): “You have listened, you
have seen, you have suffered, you have [the case]. You be the judge.”

