Quirinus Kuhlmann’s learned interest in numerological and
linguistic principles was inseparable from his religious quest to
comprehend the dialectic in the unfolding of the Word. Even though
he turned from the intellectual world in the 1670’s, he did not really
cease to share the general poetic concerns of his age. Thus ideas
about language advanced in the precocious lyrical experimentation of
his Himmlische Libes-Kiisse (1671) continued to manifest themselves
in his pseudo-scriptural Kiihlpsalter (1684ff.). Testifying to the
poet’s synthesis of rational and inspirational understanding of
language is the closeness of his Neubegeisterter Bohme (publ. 1674)
and correspondence with the renowned polyhistor Athanasius Kircher.1 Proudly issued as Quirini Kuhlmanni Epistolae duae, Prior de
Arte magna Sciendi sive Combinatoria, Posterior de Admirabilibus
quibusdam Inventis; e Lugduno-Batava Romam transmissae cum
Responsoria Viri in Orbe terrarum quadripartito celeberrimi, Athanasi
Kircheri. Lvgd. Batavorum. Imprimuntur pro Auctore & venduntur
a Lotho de Haes 1674. [Two Letters of Quirinus Kuhlmann, the First
on the Great or Combinatory Art of Knowledge, the Second on
Certain Wonderful Discoveries; Sent from Leyden to Rome with the
Response of the Man most Celebrated in the Four Quarters of the
Globe, Athanasius Kircher. Leyden. Printed for the Author and sold
by Lotho de Haes 1674.], this remarkable exchange illustrates not
only the artistic logic in Kuhlmann’s approach to language, but also
the contrasting scientific approach championed by Kircher, represen­
tative of forces which enabled modern philology to emerge from the
tangle of seventeenth-century speculation.2
Kircher’s influence on Kuhlmann appears to have started shortly
after publication of the former’s Ars magna sciendi sive combinatoria
in Amsterdam in 1669. In a commentary on his own experimental
sonnet “Der Wechsel menschlicher Sachen” in the Himmlische Libes-

89

Kusse, and again in the “Vorgesprach” to his Geschicht-Herold
(1672), the poet emphasized the importance of the polyhistor’s
fusion of logical and rhetorical principles in a kind of calculus. He
even attempted to apply Kircher’s conceptural series, transferring the
order of various tabulated categories directly into poetry in many
sonnets of the Himmlische Libes-Kusse and quite notably in the
Pindaric ode in chapter one of the Geschicht-Herold.3
Kuhlmann’s first letter to Kircher, dated January 4, 1674, reveals
the extent of his craving for an art of arts and a method of methods.
Citing a wide list of late-Renaissance interpreters of a universal
system, he views them all as striving with more or less success toward
a comprehension of things adumbrated by the peerless Raymond
Lull. However, unlike their great predecessor, their insufficiencies
result from various failures to derive knowledge from the “universal
center” (ED 5). This expression characteristically relates the Lullian
method of generating terms from a few irreducible tenets to the
Bohmean belief in an original creative core in man and nature. Just as
the Bohmean seeks the meaning under the signature of things, so the
true Lullian — in Kuhlmann’s view — harkens to the spirit, not the
letter: “sic Lullum scire non est Artis alphabeta verbalia cognoscere,
Syllogistice ilia proferre, sed realem vim sub illis ex universo Naturae
libro latentem intelligere, & omnibus posse applicare” (ED 5). [Thus,
to know Lull is not a matter of acquiring knowledge of the verbal
alphabets of his Art and working them out in Syllogisms, but of
perceiving, from the whole book of nature, the force hidden under
them and being able to apply it to all things.] It is not long before
Kuhlmann proposes to Kircher his own “Universalem libros scribendi
Artem, vera a falsis discernentem, ultimo mundi aevo reservatam”
(ED 6) [Universal Art of writing books, for distinguishing the true
from the false, and reserved for the final age of the world], an art
which will not only utilize the Lullian alphabets according to Kir­
cher’s method, but also demonstrate all books, written or to be
written, by many thousands of methods reduced from unity into
multiplicity and vice versa. As in the Himmlische Libes-Kusse, the
creative potential of such a matrix-method makes the poet’s head
swim (“heu, quantus numerus!” [ED 7]). Hopeful of sympathetic
response and eventual patronage, he promises to send scheduled
90

volumes of his proposed encyclopedic undertaking and dedicates its
start to Kircher. This announced Ars sciendi combinatoria in philo­
logy, oratory, poetics, history, ancient and modem philosophy of the
Hebrews, Gentiles, and Christians, supernatural, Biblical, and natural
theology, divine and secular law, and hermetical medicine was, of
course, never pursued. Kuhlmann subsequently channeled his ener­
gies into his mission as a prophet, and the Kuhlpsalter was to em­
body his insights “de Philologia varia & vera, in qua omnis Oratoria,
Poesis, Historia, & c. consideratur” {ED 7) [on true and diverse
Philology, in which we deal with Oratory, Poetry, History, etc., in
their entirety]. The primacy of language as direct sacred utterance
thus replaced, but also reaffirmed, the primacy of “philologia” or
love of the Word as the generative proposition in Kuhlmann’s system.
Kircher’s kind, diplomatic reply on February 8 was not sufficient­
ly reticent to dampen Kuhlmann’s ardor. The poet did not read as
friendly hints the polyhistor’s references to the few sheets in German
received as a sample, expression of confidence in Kuhlmann’s even­
tual success in penetrating the labyrinth to the treasures of Lullian
art, request for a more modest wording of any dedication, and
assurance of continued good will even if Kuhlmann felt it necessary
to disagree with certain of his views, an abstract of which he for­
warded for purposes of clarification. What Kircher envisions is the
rational establishment and integration of a repertory of structural
definitions, the sets of which can be correlated and manipulated, as
a means to solve existing questions and to generate further capacity
to solve questions yet to be posited. Kircher’s concept actually
foreshadows the modern idea of “structure” and of a process of
symbolization underlying both verbal and non-verbal codes or
languages, while his ultimate device suggests today’s computer:
Methodus autem in hoc consistit.
Cistam conficimus in varia receptacula
distinctam, in qua omnium scientiarum rationes ita exhibentur in tabulis
conscriptae, ut de eo quispiam argumento disserere fuerit interrogatus, per
variam tabellarum translocationem,
applicationesque multiplici combinationum serie factas, innumera mox

Now, the method consists herein:
'We made a box divided into various
compartments, in which the theoreti­
cal bases of all the sciences are set
forth in tables in such a way that, no
matter what subject anyone may be
asked to speak about, he will, by
various shiftings of tables and applica­
tions of a complex series of combina-

91

arguments, ad quaestionem propositam quam fusissime per syllogismos
universales & demonstratives deducendam, sit reperturus; Haud secus ac
in Musurgia nostra praestitimus, qua
unusquique etiam Musicae imperitus
ad quamlibet melodiam artificiose concinnandam, vel unius horae spatio, aptus fit. Iterum eodem prorsus modo &
ratione qua quispiam vel unico solummodo idiomate instructus, cum omni­
bus tamen totius mundi nationibus &
populis per literas communicare & cor­
responded posse docetur; quod no­
vum repertum A. 1663. per Librum
cui titulus Polygraphia nova & univer­
salis, publici juris feci.... Veluti 1.2.
Duplex modus novi artificii linguarum
omnium; quorum prior docet, omni
linguarum genere epistolas conscribere;
alter est, omnium linguarum ad unitatem reductio, Artificium mirificum
non nisi palmari arcula conclusum,
quo quispiam cum totius orbis nationi­
bus reciproca negotiatione communi­
care poterit. 3. Hoc excipit Steganographia universalis, qua quispiam cum
altero correspondente occultos animi
conceptus communicare poterit, tanta
secreti profunditate, ut nullus adeo sit
sagax humani ingenii conatus, qui
arcanum mentis negotium penetrare
possit; idque innumeris modis et
rationibus. (ED 13-14).

tions soon find countless arguments
with which to elaborate any proposed
question in all possible fullness through
universal and demonstrative syllogisms.
Likewise, we have shown in our
Musurgia [“method of composing
music”] how anyone, even if he has no
knowledge of music, can in the space
of a single hour become capable of
skillfully producing any melody you
like. Again, in just the same way, by
our method even a man who knows
just a single language can be taught to
be able to communicate and corre­
spond in writing with all the nations
and peoples of the whole world. I
made this new discovery public in the
year 1663 in a book entitled New and
Universal Polygraphy. For instance,
1.2. A two-part method for a new
system of mastering all languages: The
first part teaches how to compose
letters in any kind of language; the
second is a reduction of all languages
to their unity, an extraordinary con­
trivance, especially when contained in
a box the size of your hand. By this
device anyone will be able to carry on
mutual business in writing with the
nations of the whole world. 3. Next
follows the Universal Steganography
[“secret writing”], which makes it
possible for anyone to share the hid­
den ideas of the mind with a corre­
spondent in such a degree of secrecy
that no attempt of human ingenuity is
acute enough to be able to penetrate
the secret business of the mind - and
this [may be carried on] in countless
ways.

The “method” can vield inexhaustible material for writing or speaking;
and the astounding paradox is that it will ultimately enable even

92

children and idiots to apply accrued knowledge beneficially. (Perhaps
we are about to test this last assumption in the twentieth century.)
Through the “method,” Kircher promises control of other branches of
knowledge such as mathematics, medicine, and chemistry, too. Once
the generative terms of the system are put in order creative invention
will flow: “Innumera alia ex hisce inveniri poterunt” (ED 15). [It
will be possible to derive countless other things from these.]4
Kuhlmann’s response on April 19, however, returns obsessively
to the theme of providential guidance. Exhilarated, he explains to
Kircher that he will not be writing the proposed dissertations by his
own choice, but rather through divine inspiration; in fact, he only
writes according to a continuous revelation directly from God; and
this occurs in his works as in his life in quinaries, with which other
significant numbers are correlated - the pattern dominant a decade
later in the Kuhlpsalter\ As the consummation of the world ap­
proaches, what was hidden under the Apocalyptic seals is being
brought forth “centraliter” (ED 18) in his books. Kuhlmann’s mil­
lenary madness is almost touching when he attempts to sway Kir­
cher, as a God-sent collaborator, to abandon what he now more
openly criticizes as the contradictory, imperfect, tedious Lullian
doctrine and to embrace the higher “Sapientiam simplicem Universalem" (ED 18); all other arts depend on and are resolved in his
own “Arte methodica centrali” (ED 20), Kuhlmann asserts. While
tentatively accepting the possibility of a Kircherian “box” (cista)
which would allow even children and idiots to select correct answers,
the poet points out that such a device — like the various calculatory
“wheels” (rotae) already invented — remains a machine. It could
never deal with inner substance, but only manipulate reality out­
wardly and remain just a game:
Sed. lusus est ingeniosus,Ingeniose
Kirchere, non methodus, prima fronte
aliquid promittens, in recessu nihil solvens. Sine cista enim puer nihil potest
respondere, & in cista nihil praeter
verba intelligit; tot profert, quot audit,
sine intellects... (ED 21)

But it is just an ingenious game,
Ingenious Kircher, not a method,
promising something on the surface,
but solving nothing deep down. For
without the box the boy can answer
nothing, and with the box he under­
stands nothing but words. He produces
whatever he hears, without understand­
ing, like a parrot.

93

To this artificial production of mere “Scientes’ instead of
“Sapientes,” Kuhlmann contrasts recognition of the true deriving
from the “centrum rerum” (ED 22). If his program, too, incorporates
instruction in the principles of grammar and eloquence, this involves
not sterile rote learning, but training in the actual generation of a
surprising abundance of words and forms from the hidden potential
of language, that is, the creative act of adding to language by deriving
variety from essentials. The law of analogy determines that the same
principle of variation operates in history, logic, etc. Long before
Hamann, Herder, and the Romantic theorists distinguish the poetic
from the prosaic vision, Kuhlmann separates creative “poetry” from
“versification,” i.e., from mere perception, appreciation, or mechani­
cal imitation. Most important and for him Biblically grounded, is the
fact that poetry, the “science of wisdom,” springs from man’s inward
or Adamic core:
Poesis nec discitur, nec docetur:
Versificatoria quidem metrica facillime
discitur & docetur, sed haec serva
Poesios, non Poesis est, quae nec
metro indiget, Grammatici, Historici,
Logici, Rhetoris, sive sermoninantis,
narrantis, disputantis, exornantis munere ficto fungens. Nulla autem Scientia Sapientiae proprior divina Poesi:
nulla magis hactenus ignota, cum tamen
nulla magis nota. Haec versus metricos
fundens, versu sola cunctas artes scientiasque exprimit, poeticans autem, qua
poesis proprie est, omne scibile humanum excedit. Genius versificatorius
multis contigit, Poeticus paucissimis,
qui in Davide ac Salomone maxime
eminuit. Si puer ingenium versificatorium possideret, versificatoriam in
paucis tabellis inclusam interpretarer,
methodumque docerem extemporales
versus fundendi, sed versus, non poema:
si verb simul haberet poeticum ingeni­
um, indicarem ex omnibus rebus praesentibus artis magnae Poetices fontes,

94

Poetry is neither learned nor
taught. Metrical versification is, of
course, easily learned and taught, but
this is the servant of Poetry, not
Poetry, which does not require meter,
but fulfills what are falsely claimed as
the functions of Grammar, History,
Logic, and Rhetoric, that is, carrying
on conversation, telling a story,
making an argument, embellishing a
discourse. No Science is closer to Wis­
dom than divine Poetry; none has been
more unknown up until now, at the
same time as none has been more
widely known. As the producer of
verses in meter, it alone can express
all the arts and sciences in verse, but
as the maker of poems, which is the
proper function of poetry, it surpasses
all human knowledge. Many have had
genius in writing verse, but few in
in writing poetry, of whom David
and Solomon stood out most promi­
nently. If a boy possessed natural
talent for writing verse, I would ex-

quos Versificatores possunt gustare,
Poetae solum exprimere. (ED 23f.)

plain versification in a few tables, and
teach the method of producing verses
ex tempore — but it would be verses
he then produced, not a poem. If
along with this he really had natural
poetic talent, I would show him the
sources of the great art of Poetry in
the immediacy of all things. Versifiers
can appreciate these sources, but Poets
alone can express them.

Kuhlmann’s thesis of “analogy” implies that the creative flow of
language is the deepest, most authentic expression of the mind.
Poetic inspiration indeed occupies the seat of theology in its preced­
ence over science and philosophy. As a reading of the book of
Nature, Kuhlmann asserts, “Naturaescientia” teaches about outward,
visible things past, present, or future. As a reading of the book of
Scripture, “Naturaeprudentia” teaches the ethical application of the
microcosmic and macrocosmic combinatory “wheel.” But, from
reading the book of Conscience, “In Naturaesapientia verb causam
originemque mundi, ut extiterit, existit ac extiturus sit, ex ipso
creationis centro in unitate trinitateque dicerem, ac hie simul, quae
Salamon scivit.” [In accordance with the wisdom of nature I would
tell of the cause and origin of the world, how it was, is and will be,
from the very center of creation in unity and trinity, and also this,
that Solomon knew.] That is, in poetic knowing as in the creation
itself inheres a universal potential: "Omnium enim artifex docuit me
Sapientia” (ED 25). [For Wisdom, the maker of all things, has taught
me] Yet despite Kuhlmann’s vaunting of the superiority of his own
“method” and the unmatched creative endowment of his own
“combinatory wheels” (ED 27), we detect his concern over the
improper priority of linguistic interests which he infers from Kircher’s work. He reasons that if one first teaches how to write in every
kind of language, and then derives from all extant languages their
unifying or underlying structure, one will be dealing with an un­
wieldy repertory of invented, artificial modes as well as with an
overwhelming plethora of the past, present, or potential natural
forms. This notion is elsewhere very tempting for the poet, as evi­
denced by his fascination for projecting astronomical calculations

95

according to various theoreticians. But here, either unable to grasp
or unwilling to accept the possibility of a rational, abstract languagecode, he fears that the scientific mind — in the quest for an artificial
language — is ignoring the source and goal of natural harmony and
thereby further intensifying the confusion of tongues:
Libere dicam: Omnes suo voto
exciderunt, linguarum harmonium naturalem minime attendentes, maximamque confusionem in linguas introducentes. (ED 28)

I shall speak frankly: They all lost
sight of their own wish, paying not the
slightest attention to the natural
harmony of languages, and introducing
the greatest confusion into languages.

Nonetheless, despite reservations, Kuhlmann eagerly probes with
questions as to how soon and in which order Kircher proposes to
enable writing in all languages or to reduce them to unity. The gift
of tongues at Pentacost is cited as a rare instance of the revival of
universal speech, and obviously such capacity excites his imagina­
tion. A genuine universal language would, in Kuhlmann’s view, have
to partake of the qualities of the real, lost original tongue of the
human race or a later, relatively less corrupt instance of it.
Minime est imposibile lingua Uni­
versal! artificial! cum omnibus mundi
Populis agere; sed qualis qualis haec
est, Spuria est linguae sensualis desperditae, qua Primiparens Adamus, ejusque liberi ante confusionem Babylonicam locuti, qua Apostoli in festo
Pentacostes loquebantur, quam omnes
Gentes intelligunt. Haec justa Dei
paena in tot linguas se transfudit, ut
Mater linguarum hodie nesciatur,
quamquam in verbo Jeova sive quin­
que vocalibus occulta jaceat. Hanc
artificialem Linguam naturalem Universalem in Lexico Universali Harmonico, & Corpore Adagiorum Harmonico tradere me voluisse in Quinquennalium Admirandorum Commemoratione senties. (ED 28f.)

96

It is not in the slightest impossible
to treat with all the Peoples of the
world by means of an artificial Univer­
sal language. But whatever sort of
thing that may be, it is a bastard off­
spring of that lost sensual language in
which our first parent Adam and his
children spoke before the confusion of
Babel and in which the Apostles spoke
on the feast of Pentacost and which
was understood by all Races. By God’s
just punishment this was changed into
so many languages that the Mother of
languages is today unknown, although
it lies hidden in the word Jeova, or the
five vowels. You will sense that in mycalling to mind of the Wondrous
Quinaries I wanted to render this
artificial Language natural and Univer­
sal in a Harmonious Universal Lexicon

and a Harmonious Body of Proverbs.
[Note: Babel actually appears under its
association with Babylon in this passage.]

Kuhlmann’s linkage of his sense of the simplest, primal, but also real
utterance, and of his predestined “fiveness,” will be discussed below.
In his second letter to Kircher he already contemplates the creation
of a numerologically satisfying polytrope Song - the future quinary,
pseudoscriptural Kiihlpsalter - in which expression of the combina­
tory potential of language will take shape:
Unum Carmen Polytropon, cen­
tum millibus versus constans, meditabar aliquando, quot versus, tot erant &
similitudines & inter se Combinationes
metro materiaque per tot millia millium Combinationum semper ilaesa.
Argumentu tarn mirificissimi Poematis
Deo, divinoque Amori consecrabam;
qui Scopus unus unicusque verae
Poesios. (ED 30f.)

I once considered a Much-wander­
ing Song [“epic”] consisting of a
hundred thousand verses. The number
of verses was matched by number of
comparisons and interrelated Combi­
nations, and yet the meter and the
subject matter remained unimpaired
through so many thousands of thou­
sands of Combinations. I consecrated
the subject of this most wonderful
poem to God and His divine Love,
which is the one unique Goal of true
poetry. [Note: Kuhlmann may intend
a wordplay associating scopus also
with scop, i.e., God as supreme bard.]

In turn, Kircher replies tactfully that he feels himself to be incapable
and inept in Kuhlmann’s described sublime science and that all his
own writings have been accomplished by ordinary human means:
Quae scripsi ego, divina adspirante
gratia, humano more, id est, studio &
labore adquisita Scientia scripsi; non
divinitus inspirata aut infusa, cujusmodi puram inter Mortales dari non existimo. (ED 42).

I have written these things with
the favour of divine grace, but in the
human way: that is, I have written
from Knowledge obtained by study
and hard work, not from knowledge
divinely inspired or infused, and do
not believe that knowledge purely of
that sort exists among men.

He sends a descriptive bibliography of completed or committed works
with the objective of clarifying his purpose and inducing due caution:
97

Ecce, Vir praestantifiime, haec
Tibi pro mea sinceritate & amore vere
germano indicanda duxi, ut in arcanis,
antequam lucem videant, debita cautela utaris. (ED 43)

You see, most excellent Sir, that
out of my sincere and truly brotherly
love I thought that these matters
should be made known to you so that
you would employ the appropriate
degree of caution in your private
writings, before they saw the light of
day.

Kuhlmann takes the bait and proudly prints this impressive list.4
Besides studies on magnetism, light, volcanic action, stellar space,
geography, the critical history of numerological concepts, subter­
ranean nature, physiology, medicine, analogical symbolism, musical
theory, mathematics, sound, combinatory methodology, etc., there
are numerous works on the Egyptian language, hieroglyphic writing,
religion, and civilization. Kuhlmann gives no indication of being
aware of the latter works’ scientific context and their direct relation
to the polyhistor’s books on China and the Etruscans. Kircher’s
researches as the founder of German Egyptology, for example, his
magnificent three-part Oedipus Aegyptiacus (1652-54), bridge the
realms of the Renaissance tradition of the Ancient Theology and
modern linguistics, anthropology, and comparative religion.5 But the
scriptural associations suggested by Kircher’s Area Noe (1673) and
extensive Turris Babel (1673) overwhelm all other consideration of
Egypt for Kuhlmann, and he concludes his printing of the trans­
mitted bibliography with his own outburst of prophetic railing
against the “Horrendum Babylonis” (ED 50), that is, rulers, academ­
icians, orthodox theologians, established schools of medicine and
science, and misguided mankind in general. Ele again casts huge
numbers about to indicate the power of his own theosophical specu­
lations, which can only be resolved “in vero Centro" (ED 51).
When four years later Kuhlmann celebrates and dedicates his own
birthday as a sacred event, he describes his own first utterance as the
primal sound out of the unfathomable center of being:
Gelobet seistu, Gott, von mir in diser Stund,
Darinn mit Aa zuerst verherrlicht dich mein Mund!
Der du gantz Wunderlich das Leben mir gegeben,
Und wunderlicher noch dich lassest itz erheben.
(Kps. 16; 4-8)

98

God elevates himself marvellously in the vowel A, the surviving
Adamic cry of the innocent child, because it is the irreducible, yet
generative core of all language. Harsdorffer had dealt with “Die I.
Frage. Warumb das A der erste Buchstab in dem Abe seye?” and duly
noted that it begins all known alphabets.6 As his copious citations of
linguistic speculation elsewhere show, this passing mention implicitly
reminded the reader of the concept that the A, as primal start,
remained intact despite all the irregularities and changes which set in
after the confusion of tongues. As a sign of the origins, the A hinted
at and anchored the order underlying the seeming confusion. Harsdorffer also cited Kircher’s explanation that the A provides a total
diagram of existence, because its five points contain latent the
primary numbers and sounds.7 Kuhlmann believes with deadly
earnest in the symbolic sum of these (1,2,3,4,5) as fifteen or the
quinary and quintessence interacting with the trinity. As he writes to
Kircher, the five vowels are the constitutive elements of the potent
holy name of IEOVA: “... in verbo Jeova sive quinque vocalibus
[Mater linguarum] occulta jaceat” {ED 28). [... in the word Jeova
or five vowels [the Mother of languages] lies hidden]. In Disquisitio
IV of the Specimen philologiae germanicae (1646) [Source Book of
Germanic Philology], Harsdorffer had also cited, among others,
Scaliger’s hypothesis that mankind could have invented or discovered
the primal idea of the Creator in its first use of sound by combining
the first vowel and consonant, A + B yielding Aba or “father”. Kuhl­
mann now embraces as meaningful the widely held concept of the
combinatory potential of sounds represented in the alphabet, which
Harsdorffer had done much to popularize in his teaching “Vom
Buchstabenwechsel.”8
Both in his Lehrreiche Weifiheit-Lehr-Hof-Tugend-Sonnenblumen (1671) and Geschicht-Herold (1672), Kuhlmann shows himself
predisposed to fuse two contemporary ideas: that of a generative
“calculus” of letter-number, and that of the “Japhethic” exclusion of
German from the full repercussions of the confusion of tongues,
with a resultant survival of its potential as a sacred language. Harsdorffer had discussed noncommittally the chauvinistic theory of the
sixteenth-century scholar Goropius Becanus that, contrary to calum­
ny, the barbarians, i.e., babeles, were actually the Greeks and Romans;

99

and that, moreover, the Romans were only “half,” and in this sense
decadent, Greeks, whereas the older heroic Greek language, and
ethos, bears a closer resemblance to German (Specimen, Disquisitio
VIII).9 But in Kuhlmann’s pseudo-scriptural writings, the primacy of
German in any final revelation is definitely programmatic. We hear
it in such wordplays as the refrain of Kiihlpsalm 40, “Als er betrachtete des Babylonischen Antichristenthums Athenienser, Apollossohne und Delosfreunde” while anchored in Greek waters in 1678:
Babel schlug Abel um den Bel:
Babel schlagt Abel durch das El.

Kuhlmann tends to associate sound patterns with concepts, feelings,
and motions of spirit throughout his work. But at times his mind is
so focused on naming, exhorting, rebuking, or narrating that referen­
tial musicality recedes or virtually disappears, and at other times he
varies and combines levels. Here a magical incantation or litany seems
to predominate over numerological, anagrammatic, and other features,
and he approaches the intensely song-like lyrical writing of the
Nuremberg school.10 Thus we are justified in trying to interpret the
“musical” associations in such powerful rhyming terms as the dimin­
ishing series Babel, Abel, Bel, and El, since Kuhlmann regards himself
to be the leader of the “Abelzunft.”
The following remarks make no claim to completeness or finality
and serve only to suggest further work in this direction. We can
hypothesize that, in the refrain, the false god Bel (Baal) is struck
down by El, or the uncorrupted God who appears under one of His
ancient designations in Hebrew scripture. In other places in the
Kiihlpsalter, a capital L. stands for London or Paris as new centers of
the living Spirit where Kuhlmann operates; e.g., “A.L.L.E.S.” refers
to Amsterdam, London, Lutetia (Paris), Edinburgh, and Smyrna
(e.g., Kps. 62-66). When Abel strikes through El, the B drops from
the corrupt or confused form, and Abel is thus redeemed or reemerges
from Babel. The name Abel probably reflects for Kuhlmann, among
other things, a dialectic process in which the condition [b] attaches
to primal being [A] and is the intervening problematic stage separat­
ing Adamic man from God [El]: A-b-El. In the relationship Babel/
100

Abel/Bel/El, Babel becomes Abel and Bel becomes El when the
secondary reflective element b (a consonant or Mitstimmer) is over­
come and transcended by the primary element A (vowel or Summer).
This dialectic occurs, for example, in the realization of the primal
utterance when, as in Scaliger’s example cited by Harsdorffer, God
is named as Father: Abba. “El” is also the significant letter of the
alphabet which, in Kuhlmann’s ABC poems, appears as “Lib-,”
“Leid,” “Licht,” “Leuchte,” etc., that is, in a positive manifestation
of processes or forces through which the Bohmean dialectic of Man
goes forward. The associational complex of the L joined with the
bright, high vowels and diphthongs often conveys masculine energy
or the Holy Spirit; the association of the diphhong ei is already,
in effect, given in the name of this person or aspect of God as “der
Hezlige Gezst.” In one sense, when Bel is overcome, Abel actually
returns to the irreducible state of A, the primal unity of the Word
in and as the simplest childlike sound. In poetic terms, however, all
these “changes” {Wechsel} occur in the musical permutations of the
refrain; they are enabled by virtue of the surviving deep correspond­
ences in the German language.
In the ABC poems, the letter Q always introduces the Bohmean
wellspring and welling terminology (Qual, quellen, Qualitat, etc.),
which through its sheer musical — and false etymological — associa­
tions expresses the mysterious story of man’s fall and suffering, both
an agony and an emergence, both a transfiguration and a return to
origins. Serious wordplay achieves uncanny felicity in certain moments
as in strophe 16 of Kiihlpsalm 53, when Kuhlmann unquestionably
feels God’s breath inspiring Adam:
Qual Gott in Adam nicht unendlich?
Sein Geist ist uns nur allzukandlich,
Darinnen Gott qualificirt,
Und den er himmlisch hat durchriihrt
Der geist, den Gott durch Adams nasen
Nach sich aus sich ihm eingeblasen
Im Paradischem lustgefild
Nach seinem eignem Ebenbild,
Das er von Gott mit Gott durchgottet,
Solt ewig leben unzerrottet.

101

After the terrible setback ending his mission to Turkey, Kuhlmann
craves confirmation of the flowering of the Word; for, “Sprach sich
nicht aus das Wort durch Worte?” (Kp. 53, str. 18). The alphabet,
an irreducible code of generative primal elements of speech, gives
comfort; its order, a seemingly arbitrary chain or series, embodies
and conceals all the potent mysteries of the unfolding Word. Thus
everything — the real historical juncture, the cycle of nature, the
phases of revelation, the dialectic of divine and human aspects and
transformations — can converge in the title of this complex ABC
poem of some 50 pages:
Sibeiniges allgemeines Abend- Nacht- Morgen- Mittagslid aus dem sibeinigem
allgemeinem giildenem ABC; sibeinig zum lobpreis Jehova-Jesus und Aufmunterung des sibentzigsibeinigen JaphetSemHam, nach recht der ewigen
unendlichen gebahrung im hochsten thone der 168 wechselungen angestimmet zu London im Sept, und das 5. 6. 7. den 16. 17. 18. Octob. 1679.

From our vantage in the twentieth century, Kuhlmann’s poetic
skein exemplifies the unresolved tangle of ontological and mechanistic
views of the potential of the human mind in the Baroque. The
diverging of these strands will bring dramatic shifts and oppositions
in German eighteenth-century literature — for example, between
exponents of ratiocination as the supreme instrument for a moral
education of the human race, and believers in organic developmental
patterning. To cite a preeminent case, the German predilection for
ontological explanations and resistance to exclusively mechanistic
ratiocination already appears in Leibniz. Though insisting on the
need for a more comprehensive ontological awareness of language
and gaining a progressively deeper grasp of the organic, sensual
aspects, Leibniz like Kircher nonetheless also continues the epochal
trend toward a scientific view of language. Because Leibniz so
rapidly grew beyond his own start as a proponent of a combinatory
art in the train of Lull and Kircher, scholarship earlier doubted the
extent of the connection between his brilliant linguistic insights and
his creation of the calculus and method of inventing further science.
Students of Leibniz still disagree not only on the question whether
his “general science” was an unfulfillable utopian hope, but also on
whether he indeed was dealing, in his own terminology, with matters

102

such as deep structure and generative and transformational grammar.
These issues can be cited here only by reference to other investi­
gators.11 More recent awareness of the interconnection of Leibniz’
early interest in an artificial international language and logical
calculus, and of his later concept of an Indo-European family tree,
an original common language and start of the human race, and the
natural superiority of German as a preserver of the good qualities of
that lingua adamica, is broadly synthesized in D.P. Walker’s excellent
article, “Leibniz and Language.”12 Walker demonstrates that Leib­
niz’ reductionism, in simplifying language to its minimal logical
elements, and his psychological-epistemological and etymological
studies in the Nouveaux Essais and Collectanea Etymologica, reflect
one and the same concern to discover the natural patterns inherent
in language.13
The present chapter merely points to a wider context of German
speculation in the seventeenth century about the general structure
of language and language’s analogies to other organized thought
processes and expressions of the mind. Kircher assures Kuhlmann
that a cista, or mechanized coordinator of all tabulated definitions,
will be able to relate parallel tracks in all forms of language - i.e.,
writing, music, mathematics, etc. — and has such immediate applica­
tion as in cryptography (“occultos animi conceptus communicare”
[ED 14]). Though never worked out, the Kircherian polygraphia
resembles the Leibnizian characteristica universalis, or reduction to
calculable signs and use of signs in logical operations, in order to
investigate phenomena of any type.14 Thus, not surprisingly, Leib­
niz’ quest for a scientia generalis is reflected, with regard to language,
in his probing of the relationships underlying natural languages,
hypothetical and actually concocted artificial languages, such evolving
abstract, yet real codes as music and mathematics, and a possible
general or rational language. In a leap which links him with today’s
structural anthropologists, Leibniz does not doubt that organic,
“irregular” forms on varying levels of complexity partake of the
same profound logic which underlies all life and derive from the
pre-established harmony of the universe. The gap between a ration­
alistic and an organic view of language - i.e., between Leibniz and
Humboldt - only appears wide if we superimpose this distinction

103

on an essentially continuous development of German linguistics,
contrary to the very sense of Leibniz’ rejection of Descartes and
Locke.15
Though few commentators mention Kircher in a positive way in
this regard, the Jesuit polyhistor illustrates the existence of a German
scientific tendency and capacity to entertain vitalistic concepts of
nature, while exploring the possibility of generative forms in logic
and language. Probably influenced by Paracelsus, Kircher believed
in the presence of a goal-oriented force in natural processes, and in
the collaboration of external and internal factors of development.16
His Area Noe (published 1675) posited that not all later known
species were present in the Arc, but many developed out of the
original primal types on board after their dispersal from it. These
were the primaevae species from which all later actual ones come
realiter, as the semen universale manifests itself variously, becoming
semen particulare. Epigenesis, or growth of- higher out of lower
forms, takes place, but no genuine new formation, insofar as the vis
plastica merely realizes stages of ontogenesis. In a medical treatise
on the plague, Scrutinium Physico-Medicum (1658), Kircher suggested
that tiny organisms which were probably only detectable with an
excellent microscope carried infection from sick to healthy persons;
his idea was so novel, that it was ignored.
But we can recognize the analogous thrust in Leibniz’ concept of
meaningful aggregate entities on all levels of complexity, all as
monads partaking of the primal forming which has issued out of the
essential laws of nature. The Leibnizian parallelism of the spritual
and material creation, deriving from their preestablished harmony, is
a worthy replacement for the Bohmean parallelism of organic and
dialectic process (Ausgeburt and Auswickelung). The confused
Bohmean drama of incarnation gives way to the rational order of
evolutionary law. Interestingly, Leibniz’ view of the interrelation of
corporeal and psychological “perceptions” making up the total
person admits a kind of direction which can be largely unconscious,
as well as cumulative, without implying any lack of self-determina­
tion. Instead, the facts of biological evolution and historical ex­
perience indicate that the human being realizes a preformed capacity
to acquire and integrate further unconscious and conscious ex­

104

perience. This proposition adumbrates not just the Kantian cate­
gories and modes of perception (time, space, causality, mathematics,
logic), but also the Humboldtian preformed capacity (language).17
Kircher’s and Leibniz’ shared interest in the linguistic interrela­
tion of corporeal and psychological factors, or of reality and mind,
amounts to more than an epochal affinity. Kircher painstakingly
compared the writing systems of the Egyptians, Chinese, and Aztecs
in Oedipus Aegyptiacus in order to find the vestiges and determine
the rules of a possible primeval picture language. In the Erquickstunden and elsewhere, Harsdorffer had popularized the more limited
question whether the European alphabets derived via the Hebrew
and Phoenician from a more ancient pictorial imagination. As Walker
points out, Leibniz eventually thought that Chinese characters might
derive from the hexagrams of the I Ching, in which he detected a
system of binary numbers, and that, if Europeans once grasped these
secrets, they could invent a special international language for intellec­
tuals and communicate effectively with Chinese savants. In their
intense consideration of the relationship between verbum and res,
Kircher and Leibniz are spiritual forebears of modern scholars who
search for anthropological and cultural data inherent in language and
texts, regarded as documents, and of such eminent philologists in the
Freudian group and “Wort-und-Sache” movement as the late Hans
Sperber.
Though the letters to Kuhlmann do not elaborate in sufficient
detail, Kircher’s wish to define the basic operations of all languages
(speech, music, logic, etc.) and relate them to a calculable key
resembles Leibniz’ thinking, insofar as Kircher’s “method” supposed­
ly will enable us to correlate and codify language; on an immediate
practical level, it supposedly already permits us to teach such arts as
musical composition and safe communication of the “hidden con­
cepts of the spirit.” Furthermore, Kircher is convinced that , in order
to learn to manipulate a cista or write in a universal language, the
operator need be accquainted with just one established code, his own
native language. It is precisely in that sense he sums up his “Poly­
graphia, sive Artificium linguarum, quo cum omnibus totius Mundi
populis, & linguis unusquisque, licet non alia, quam materna lingua
instructus correspondere posse demonstratur...” {ED 47). [Poly105

graphy, or the Theory and Art of languages, by which, as I show,
anyone, no matter if he has never learned any but his native tongue,
can correspond with all the people and languages of the whole world.]
Implicitly, primal and sufficient logic resides in each tongue.18
For Kuhlmann, the primal utterance survives to greater degree in
actual vestiges of an ancient organic unity of meaning and sound.
Because of its deeper Japhethic roots, German still possesses the
sacred qualities attributable to Adamic speech, and vibrates as a
fountainhead of infinite potential. Nonetheless, albeit more cor­
rupted, other languages all deriving from this ancient source, share in
the same overall potential. An organically attached, time-bound
medium, language for Kuhlmann is also an innate capacity to grasp
and express a hypothetical infinity. Metaphorically, the potential
of language is located for Kuhlmann in its veiled numerological
correspondences; these directly link language to sacred mysteries.
Attracted principally to the suggestion of numerological revelations
in Kircher’s treatment of language as a code, Kuhlmann missed the
scientific implications. But his version of the survival in mankind of
some immediate guidance inherent in language remains an intriguing
religious counterpart to the early scientific delineation of a pre­
formed or deep structure in the human mind.

Notes

The best general treatment of this phase in the poet’s development is by
Walter Dietze, Quirinus Kuhlmann, Ketzer und Poet: Versuch einer monographischen Darstellung von Leben und Werk (Berlin, 1963), pp. 82-100. I
have discussed Kuhlmann’s broader interest in an ars combinatoria und
linguistic theory in German Baroque Poetry (New York, 1971), pp. 136-145.
2 Faber du Faur, No. 1317; references to the Epistolae duae will be by page
number after the abbreviation ED. References to the Kiihlpsalter will be by
poem and line number (or strophe) from the critical edition by Robert I.
Beare in Neudrucke deutscher Literaturwerke, N.F. 3 und 4 (Tiibungen:
Niemeyer, 1971). Translations from the original Latin are by the author,
who wishes to thank Gene M. O’Grady for checking them for accuracy.
Kircher’s voluminous writings are being made more acessible by the forth­
coming critical edition Opera Omnia by Olaf Hein and Helmut Kastl and
1

106

published by Edizioni del Mondo (Wiesbaden and Rome, 1974 ff.). A recent
general treatment of the variety of the savant’s interests, including language,
is Joscelyn Godwin, Athanasius Kircher: A Renaissance Man and the Quest
for Lost Knowledge (London, 1979). Concerning his influence on writers,
see John Fletcher, “Kircher und die deutsche Literatur,” in Universale Bildung im Barock: Der Gelehrte Athanasius Kircher, eine Ausstellung [•••],
ed. by Reinhard Dieterle et al. (Rastatt and Karlsruhe, 1981), pp. 31-39.
3 In ch. 3 of his unpublished dissertation “Das lyrische Werk Quirinus Kuhlmanns: Interpretationen zu seiner rhetorischen Struktur” (Rice University,
1970), Klaus K.L. Neuendorf examines this early impact of Kircher on
Kuhlmann’s development of a poetic “Wechselkunst,” but does not cite the
exchange of letters which intervenes after the Neubegeisterter Bohme and
before the Funffzehn Gesdnge (1677), the nucleus of the later opening book
of the Kiihlpsalter. Begun in Jena in 1670, following his “illumination,” the
Funffzehn Gesdnge were being written during the same period; songs six
and seven are dated in the year 1674. Neuendorf judges that Kuhlmann
failed to appreciate the sense or potential of a combinatory art and, spell­
bound by contemporary ideas, was sidetracked into superficial formalistic
playing with rhetorical elements. Kuhlmann’s struggle for command over
and power through language is deemed to degenerate into mechanistic
tendencies which reflect his emergent fanatical strain. Neuendorf’s anti­
pathy for the manneristic excesses he finds leads him to negate the possible
literalness in Kuhlmann’s unorthodox statements or illogical constructs. For
example, regarding the equation of scriptural insight with the knowledge
gained by Adam and Eve through sin: “Diese zweifelhaften Aussagen sind
nicht der Ausdruck der oft an der Grenze zur Blasphemie spielenden mystischen Denkens, sondern treten nur als Folge der iibersteigerten Bildlichkeit
auf” (p. 31).
4 I am conscious of the difficulty of isolating the elements which — whether
or not largely in yet unresolved relationship internally in Kircher’s encyclo­
pedic work - correspond to the modern terms “structural” and “generative.”
Herbert Ernst Brekle’s article “Die Idee einer generativen Grammatik in
Leibnizens Fragmenten zur Logik” and Marcelo Dascal’s corrective com­
mentary “About the Idea of a Generative Grammar in Leibniz” (Studia
leibnitziana, 3 [1971], 140-149 and 272-290) illustrate the problem of
distinguishing the relative significance of the “analytic” (structural) versus
“synthetic” (generative) approach even in the considerably more clarified
stage of Leibniz’ linguistic theorizing. The chapter “Zur Discussion der
analytischen Urteilstheorie in der gegenwartigen Philosophie” in Winfried
Lenders’ Die analytische Begriffs- und Urteilstheorie von G.W. Leibniz und
Chr. Wolff (Hildesheim, 1971) examines the affinity between the modern
views of “deep structure,” innate “linguistic competence,” and “generative
grammar” (Chomsky, Quine, Katz et. al.), and Leibniz’ theory of the
coincidence of subject and predicate, logical relationships of sentence

107

elements, meaning and its structuring as immanent contents of conscious­
ness, etc.; no barrier is descerned between Leibniz’ rationalism and ontologi­
cal view. As a stimulus to further research, I posit tentatively the existence
in Kircher of a cruder, yet analogous dichotomization between the urge, on
the one hand, to “formulate ‘discovery procedures’ for the establishment of
the rules of particular grammars on the basis of attested utterances” (J.
Lyons, Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics [London, 1968, p. 157]),
with strong pedagogical hopes and stress on “communication”; and, on the
other hand, the reductionist principle of arriving at the most adequate and
satisfying explanation for all phenomena, one which overcomes the “ad-hoc­
ness” or “arbitrariness” of language while emphasizing its creative, expres­
sive aspects as a carrier of information that derives from its own intrinsic
rules.
5 In his excellent book The Ancient Theology: Studies in Christian Platonism
from the Fifteenth to the Eighteenth Century (London, 1972), D.P. Walker
concentrates on France and England and makes only brief mention of Kircher’s and Leibniz’ deep involvement in the comparative study of religion
and culture in his chapter “Late Seventeenth-Century France — Jesuits in
China.” Besides a replacement for Max Wundt’s book on Die deutsche
Schulmetaphysik des 17. Jahrhunderts (Tubingen, 1939), a comprehensive
study of German philosophic and literary parallels in stages of the tradition
of an “ancient theology” is sorely needed.
6 Delitiae Mathematicae et Physicae: Der Philosophischen und Mathematischen Erquickstunden Dritter Theil (1653), p. 36.
7 Erquickstunden Dritter Theil, p. 37:
Der hochberiihmte Ath. Kircherus weiset noch ein anderes Geheimnis in diesem Buchstaben/ und saget/ dafi er eine Vorbildung defi Ab- und Zunehmens alles Weltwesens.

Von 1 in 2/ von 2 in 3 reichet das Wachstum/ dann fallet es von 3 in 4/ von
4 in 5/ und dieses Ab- und Zunehmen wird miteinander durch 2 und 4
gleichstandig verbunden. Diese Gestalt haben auch die Pyramides, Flammoder Spitzseulen.
In other words, the A evinces in nuce the same dialectic patterning as the
entire cosmic and developmental drama from beginning to end; among other
things, the I equates with unity of being and creation, the 2 with duplicity
and manifoldness but also prefiguration and prophecy, the 3 with the
turning and climax in Christ’s agony, the 4 with postfiguration and fulfill­
ment, the 5 with apocalypse but also Man’s redemption in the world’s
catastrophe, as well as quintessential transfiguration of the elements. The A
also mirrors the structure of the soul, the apex of which points to and

108

touches heaven; like the pyramid, it signifies emblematically ascent, apoth­
eosis, and return to origins.
8 Erquickstunden Zweyter Theil (1651), pp. 513ff. The Kiihlpsalter responds
to contemporary suggestions that, as Harsdorffer noted (p. 516):

Die XXIV. Buchstaben im Abe. konnen nach Lawrenbergii
Rechnung verwechselt werden
620448307827051883
Nach Puteani Rechnung:
62044801733239439360000 mal.
Nach Heinrich von Etten Meinung:
620448593438860623360000 mal.

In his “V. Aufgabe Die gantze Teutsche Sprache auf einem Blatlein weisen,
by means of his famous “Fiinffacher Denkring der Teutschen Sprache,”
Harsdorffer so arranged 48 prefixes, 60 beginning and ‘rhyme” letters, 12
medial letters, 120 final letters, and 24 suffixes that anyone could dial Ger­
man words, commanding all roots or “einsylbige Stammworter,” inflections,
and rhyme-endings, forming further words from roots with the addition of
particles, and also creating purely potential “blinde oder deutungslose Worter” (pp. 516 ff.). As Wolfgang Kayser noted in his still important study,
Die Klangmalerei bei Harsdorffer: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Literatur,
Poetik und Sprachgeschichte der Barockzeit (1932; 2. unver. Aufl., Gottin­
gen, 1962), p. 185 n., with regard to the combinatory language wheel:
“Diese Praxis ist unmittelbar aus der Kabbala ubernommen. Harsd. konnte
es in dem Oedipus Aegyptiacus, II, S. 471, Rom 1653, des beriihmten Jesuiten Athan. Kircherus finden.” Also still valuable is Paul Hankamer’s study,
Die Sprache, ihr Begriff und ihre Deutung im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert: Ein
Beitrag zur Frage der literaturhistorischen Gliederung des Zeitraums (1927;
Nachdr. Hildesheim, 1965), especially the last two chs., “Grammatik, Philologie und Sprachphilosophie” and “Mystik und Naturphilosophie,” dealing
with the pronounced ontological tendency in German thought from Paracel­
sus and Bohme to Leibniz.
9 As summed up with Harsdorffer’s usual caution in the Erquickstunden (Vol.
Ill, p. 42): “Besagter Becanus wil auch behaubten/ dafi die Nachkommen
Japhets/ von welchen die Teutschen herstammen/ bey der Babylonischen
Sprach-verwirrung nicht gewesen/ weil sie lang bevor ihre Mitternachtische
Lander in Besitz gebracht/ wie hiervon ausfiihrlich zu lesen Specim. Philolg.
Germ. Disq. III. § 5.6.7.” Harsdorffer remained similarly reserved with
regard to a realist versus nominalist view of a possible universal language:
“Weren die Worter von Natur/ so musten sie von jedem natiirlicher Weise
ohne Be[k]lemung/ verstanden werden/ und solches were die durchgehende
und langgesuchte allgemeine Haubtsprache” (p. 40). Hankamer, Die Spra­
che, pp. 117-122, explains the Nuremberg principle of musical imitation of
the operations of the Logos in nature through “tonal poems” and Harsdorf-

109

fer’s inner distance from the thesis of a “Natursprache.” This has been
displaced by the sense of language’s magic as an instrument for man’s
participation in cosmic “playing.” The idea of the special civilizatory
mission of the Japhethic stock was popularized by the French linguist and
Orientalist Guillaume Postel (1510-1581), who initially focussed on the
French as destined agents of renovation, then switched to the Germans as
inheritors of Noah when he deemed the French had failed to lead a world
reformation. The idea that Germanic had escaped the worst or was exempted
in the Biblical confusion of tongues was picked up with chauvinist satisfac­
tion in Britain, too. InX Restitution of Decayed Intelligence: in antiquities.
Concerning the most noble, and renowned English Nation (1605, 1634),
Richard Verstegan praises “the Teutonicke unto this day the ground of our
speech” which reaches back to Babel, but will not go so far as Becanus who
claimed it was Adamic, and is in fact sensitive to the fact the English tongue
“is more swarued from the originall Teutonicke than the other languages
thereon depending.” Verstegan is in a long line of purists who admonish
against rampant borrowing from the Romance languages and Latin. The
distinguished Welsh linguist John Davies, in Antiquae Linguae Britannicae
Rudimenta (1621), uses the same theory of a Japhethic branch of languages
to argue the primary role of Celtic and the great civilizatory contribution
of the Celts to Europe. The case for Celtic is reinstated in the eighteenth
century by Rowland Jones in The Origin of Languages and Nations (1764)
and by James Parsons in Remains of Japhet: Being Historical Inquiries into
the Affinity and Origin of the European Languages (1767). Jones declares
“there seems to be no room to doubt its being the first speech of mankind,”
and Parsons asserts “the confusion and dispersion did not affect any of the
issue of Japhet or Shem.” The movement toward a secular explanation of
the diversity of languages, albeit originating in a rudimentary common
pristine tongue, can be found in works such as Joseph Priestly, A Course
of Lectures on the Theory of Language and Universal Grammar (1762),
which carries further the general direction represented by Comenius and
Wilkins in the seventeenth century.
10 Michael Hall treats the musical principles of structure in Nuremberg writing
in his unpublished paper, “Aspiring to ‘The State of Song’: Klaj and the
Niirnberg Lyric” (State University of New York at Birminghamton, 1973);
pp. 82 ff. deal with the characteristic internal rhyming and superfluity of
rhyme. As evidence of this tendency coming to the fore at certain moments
in Kuhlmann, I would point to the virtual incantation in his introduction
to Book III of the Kiihlpsalter when he speaks of “Geschicht- Licht- und
Geticht-Christen” (vol. I, p. 94) and develops his concept with musical
variations such as “GetrichtChristen, deren Gott der Pabst, Apap. Babel und
Faber (p. 96).
11 The classical early study of Leibniz’ search for an artifical universal
language is given in La Logique de Leibniz (Paris, 1901) by Louis Courturat,

110

who also edited the important sources. Opuscules et fragments inedits de
Leibniz (Paris, 1903; Nachdr., Hildesheim, 1961). Earlier investigation in
Germany, such as August Schmarsow’s critical study and edition, Leibniz
und Schottelius: Die unvorgreiflichen Gedanken (Strassburg, 1877), tended
to concentrate more on Leibniz’ praise of his native language, and somewhat
less on his elaborate etymological study of its roots, discovery of the Indoeuropean family, and interest in such proponents of German’s preeminence
as the nature philosophers and mystics, including Bohme and Kuhlmann.
The best representative of efforts to round out the fuller picture is Sigrid
von der Schulenburg in Leibniz als Sprachforscher (written ca. 1929-39;
publ., Frankfurt a.M., 1973); her ch., “Verwandtschaft der Sprachen und
Volker” (pp. 68-114), is unexcelled in its presentation of his gradual con­
version of the “Japhethic” and “Celto-Scythian” theories into the grander
schematization of language groups very close to our modern view. In his
article “The Languages of the World: A Classification by Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz,” in Studies in Germanic Languages and Literatures: In Memory of
Fred O. Nolte (St. Louis, 1963), John T. Watermann arrives independently
at similar conclusions. Further useful studies of the interrelatedness of Leib­
niz’ interest in natural and abstract languages are: Gunther Patzig, “Leibniz,
Frege und die sogenannte ‘lingua characteristica universalis’,” and Hans
Aarsleff, “The Study and Use of Etymology in Leibniz,” Studia Leibnitiana
Supplementa, 3 (1969), 103-112 and 173-189; Hans Burckhardt, “Anmerkungen zur Logik, Ontologie und Semantik bei Leibniz,” Studia Leibnitiana,
6 (1974), 49-68; see also note 4. Other treatments of interest include:
Angele Curras Rabade, “Consideraciones sobre la lengua universal leibniziana.” Anales del Seminario de Metafisica (Madrid, 1970), pp. 7-39; Beate
Dreike, “Der EinfluB von Leibniz’ Philosophie auf Herders Naturauffassung” (Diss. Bonn, 1971); Renate Elisabeth Nuerner, “Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz’ Collectanea Etymologica: Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Etymologie” (Diss. University of Southern California, 1971); Albert Heinekamp,
“Ars characteristica und natiirliche Sprache bei Leibniz,” Tijdschrift filos.,
34 (1972), 446-488.
12 Journal of Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 36 (1972), 294-307.
13 In “Leibniz on Innate Ideas and the Early Reactions to the Publication of
the Nouveaux Essais (1765),” Journal of the History of Philosophy, 12
(1974), 437-454. Giorgio Tonelli examines the origins of Leibniz’ “innatism” in relation both to Locke and Descartes and to German philosophic
tendencies of the earlier seventeenth century (including such stimuli for
Kuhlmann as the pansophists and Kircher), and shows how misinterpreta­
tions delayed reception of the full import of his psychological and epistemo­
logical views in the eighteenth century, even for a “dissenter” to the empiri­
cal mentality of the age such as Herder (p. 452 f.); Leibniz’ influence on the
Kantian upheaval of 1769 probably was enabled in combination with the
interest in Crusius’ analogous doctrine.

Ill

14 As my earlier essay was going to press, an important comprehensive work
on the Western philosophy of language by George Steiner, After Babel:
Aspects of Language and Translation (New York and London, 1975)
placed the German development from Leibniz to Humboldt and the Ro­
mantics in the larger European context (vide especially pp. 73-88). Be­
sides showing the indebtedness of modern linguistics to that tradition,
Steiner touches on the seventeenth-century interest in creating an inter­
national auxiliary language, a scientific “universal character” susceptible
of mathematical manipulation, and a “true universal semantic” based
on language’s deep structure which manifests itself in such figures as
Comenius, Kircher, and Leibniz variously (vide expecially pp. 198-205).
15 Eugenio Coseriu’s treatment of Leibniz and Wilhelm von Humbodt as the
pivotal figures in Part I of Die Geschichte der Sprachphilosophie von der
Antike bis zur Gegenwart (Stuttgart, 1969), pp. 149-162, is consistent in
its negative assessment of Leibniz’ interest in devising a manageable system
of signs for a universal language as an error recurrent since “R. Llull bis zu
den falschen Universalien des heutigen Transformationalismus” (p. 149).
Leibniz’ awareness that language is not a completed, given naming of the
possible, but consists of actual species of speech with their particular socialcultural existence and unrealized potential, supposedly goes against the
purpose of his own ars characteristica universalis. In the same vein, Coseriu
denies resemblance between the modern concept of deep structure and
Humboldt’s concept of “Sprachschopfung” or reshaping from within, as
the “inner form” continues to manifest distinct cultural characteristics of
a particular language. F.H. Huberti raises this issue more productively in his
article “Leibnizens Sprachverstandnis, unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung
des III. Buches der Neuen Untersuchungen iiber den Verstand”, Wirkendes
Wort, 16 (1966), 361-375, when he asks whether there actually is a genuine
conflict between Leibniz’ early wish for a characteristica generalis and later
sense of the organic vitality and sensual qualities of language. Modern
theories of language are deemed to work out basic propositions at which
Leibniz arrived by ontological postulation because he had to oppose the
arbitrariness implicit in Locke’s view of the individual user of language.
Belief in a pre-established harmony entails as corollary that not only ratio­
nal, abstract constructs, but also the developmental irregularities of natural
languages reflect an underlying logic. This grasp of language as a structure
of relations derives, in Huberti’s opinion, directly from the youthful in­
spiration recorded in Leibniz’ De arte combinatoria (1666). In his article
“Point de vue: Leibniz und die These vom Weltbild der Sprache,” Zeitschrift fur Deutsches Altertum und Deutsche Literatur, 98 (1969), 216240, Gunther Heintz also affirms the relevance of Leibniz’ cultivation of his
German mother tongue, construction of a language of signs, and ontological
approach to language. The judgment that, via Kant and Herder, Humboldt
first provided a cure for Leibniz’ lack of system leaves out of account the

112

typically “metalinguistic” stamp of Leibniz’ thought. But this should not
confuse us with regard to his theory of language. In fact, Leibniz is Hum­
boldt’s forerunner, because he attributes an inner character to language
which parallels the subjective freedom of the monad; the individuality of an
entire people is reflected in the cumulative experience of their means of
communication. For Leibniz, too, a language amounts to a cultural history
and world view. Leroy E. Loemker, Struggle for Synthesis: The Seven­
teenth-Century Background of Leibniz’ Synthesis of Order and Freedom
(Cambridge, Mass. 1972), p. 179, also relates Leibniz’ search for a perfect or
ideal language to his ontological sense: “Language itself is thus to be under­
stood as possessing its own harmony, reflecting the general cultural order,
and in a limited way the unity of all order. It has been pointed out that
Leibniz’ remarkable studies in comparative linguistics were inspired by his
conviction that the universal harmony demands that there be a continuous
evolution of forms and structures among all the languages of the earth.”
16 I am heavily indebted for my summary of Kircher’s biological theories in
this paragraph to the monograph by Joseph Gutmann, Athanasius Kircher
(1602-1680) und das Schopfungs- und Entwicklungsproblem (Fulda,
1938).
17 Leibniz’ contribution to the discovery of the unconscious is examined in the
light of Freudian, Jungian, and post-Romantic psychology by Hans Ganz,
Das Unbewufite bei Leibniz in Beziehung zu modernen Theorien (Zurich,
Leipzig, 1917). In “Sein" und “Geschehen” bei Leibniz, unter besonderer
Beriicksichtigung seiner Philosophic der organischen Wirklichkeit (Munich,
1929), Anton Fischer demonstrates how, in conceiving of the existence of
meaningful aggregate and evolving entities on all levels of complexity, Leib­
niz was also capable of understanding the existence of both an “inborn” and
a therewith integratable “acquired” unconscious (p. 70 f.), as the larger part
of the “perceiving” and “representing” continuum of the mind (p. 65). In
the larger unity of the mind, this unconscious gradually shades into the
focused conscious (p. 72).
The chapter “Nisi Ipse Intellectus” in Herbert Wildon Carr’s Leibniz
(Boston, 1929) discusses Leibniz as the first modern philosopher to assert
clearly that the whole mind is active and constructive, that reality does not
consist of things, but is the realization of possibilities, and that the world
process is a complex spiritual development out of immanent potential. Anna
Theresa Tymieniecka treats as interconnected Leibniz’ psychological views,
including the role of the unconscious (Part I, ch. 2), and the principle of the
creative “organic continuity of nature” (Part II, Ch. 2) in Leibniz’ Cos­
mological Synthesis (Assen, 1964).
18 Professor Gerhard Strasser kindly called to my attention an analysis of
“Athanasius Kircher’s Universal Polygraph” by George E. McCracken in
Isis, 39,(1948), 215-228.McCracken concentrates on the system of “secret”
writing proposed by Kircher in which Latin functions as the standard, i.e.,

113

sole simultaneously encode-decode language. McCracken mentions briefly
kernel notions of a universal language which suggest a more sophisticated
approach to structural analysis by Kircher; however, since Kircher never
developed these, it is difficult to evaluate their full import apart from his
immediate interest in coordinating sets of natural languages by means of a
natural “code”. I also wish to call attention to the excellent treatment of
the quest for a universal language in seventeenth-century Europe in ch. 7 of
Paolo Rossi, Clavis Universalis: Arti mnemoniche e logica combinatoria da
Lullo a Leibniz (Milano-Napoli, 1960). Michel Serres, Le systeme de Leibniz
et ses modeles mathematiques, 2 vols. (Paris, 1968), has elaborated the
significance of Leibniz’ polysystemic approach as ancestral to contemporary
thinking in terms of codes. After my earlier essay had gone to press, the
fascinating monograph by John Neubauer, Symbolismus und symbolische
Logik: Die Idee der ars combinatoria in der Entwicklung der modernen
Dichtung (Munich, 1978), became available, showing the relevance of Leibnizian thinking for literature, especially in new forms mediated by Roman­
ticism. I have commented on his work in Modern Language Notes, 94
(1979), 1231-1237. The essay “Primal Utterance” was originally scheduled
for appearance in 1975, but the unexpected and regretted death of Dr.
Heinrich Gottwald, publisher of the Bohlau-Verlag, began an unfortunate
delay which kept the paper locked up, with others, for some four years
beyond the date of submission. Otherwise it would have come out simul­
taneously with George Steiner’s After Babel: Aspects of Language and
Translation (New York, 1975), with which, as I was delighted to learn, it
was in sympathetic attunement through a mutual interest in late Renais­
sance linguistic speculation.
