 

Between Art and Nature: Natura artifex,
Neoplatonism, and Literary Automata

A richly dressed woman stands before a forge and, using a hammer and anvil,
fashions people out of existing parts: this is Natura artifex, or Nature the artisan (Plate ). The metaphor of Natura artifex was commonly used in the early
and high medieval periods to convey Nature’s role in a three-tiered system of
creation that included the works of God, Nature, and human beings. Broadly
speaking, the metaphor turns on the idea that Nature acts as an intermediary
between the world of ideal forms and the world of matter. This metaphor is
grounded in late antique secular Neoplatonism from the fourth and fifth centuries, but became in the twelfth century one way for Latin Christian natural
philosophers to understand and explain the work of Nature in human terms.
The metaphor of Natura artifex depicts Nature’s role—to create material objects out of preexisting forms— and renders it visually (the preexisting forms
are in this image the body parts) and in the vocabulary of manufacture (Nature uses a hammer, anvil, and forge to do her work).
The combination of natural and human work reveals much about how
automata were understood and described in twelfth- and thirteenth-century
literary culture. Appearing in the Latin Christian West mainly as textual
objects in this period, automata were self-propelled metal copies of natural
forms—humans, animals, even the universe itself. Yet the automata found in
medieval romans and chansons do not sit easily alongside other examples of
human craft. Indeed, the comparison of the Throne of Solomon to a wine
press in Liudprand’s Antapodosis and the comparison of King Hugo’s revolving palace to a mill- and chariot-wheel only highlight the differences between
these kinds of objects. The revolving palace, Throne of Solomon, and atten-

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



dant musical avian automata are much more complex in terms of operation,
and much more beautiful to look at, than a capstan, such as would be used in
a wine press. Because of these differences in complexity and register, automata are usually presented as the product of intellectual rather than artisanal
endeavor. Although sometimes described in artisanal terms, they are more often characterized (e.g., in Aymeri de Narbonne) as the result of complicated
intellectual work involving natural knowledge that is mysterious, difficult,
and arcane. Likewise, their creators are scholars and magicians, rather than
artisans. Despite the fact that automata were often created for a specific end,
such as the assertion of power or to provoke wonder, they also embody the
possibility that humans can usurp Nature’s prerogative. And, as discussed
previously, in poetic texts this knowledge came from outside Latin Christendom, and was considered morally and intellectually ambiguous.
By emphasizing the extent to which philosophical ideas of the time explained the work of Nature and the work of the artist, I demonstrate in this
chapter how automata were understood in the twelfth and early thirteenth
centuries. Beginning in the fourth century, philosophers, distinguishing among
the powers and products of God, Nature, and humankind, used the metaphor of Natura artifex as a way to describe Nature’s labor. This metaphor became increasingly central in the twelfth century, due to the influence of natural
philosophers associated with the cathedral school of Chartres, near Paris. There
were numerous and overlapping ties between the students and scholars at Chartres and the Anglo-Norman court who were the patrons of the romans antiques that used the metaphor of Natura artifex in conjunction with automata.
In French romans in this period descriptions of automata, their creators, and
the methods used to make them expose apparently overlapping categories of
mimesis and natural creation, which cohere around intellectual rather than
artisanal skill. The creators of automata in these literary examples are philosophers, priests, and magi: men who can manipulate celestial forces, use the
hidden properties of natural objects, and call on demons to create and control artificial copies of natural forms.
Automata appear in twelfth- and thirteenth-century texts (romans as well
as historiae) as marvelous objects, and they evoke a complicated network of
emotions. Some of the wonder they elicit is due to the knowledge they embody. Yet equally, the copper and gold knights, archers, acrobats, and courtiers are marvelous because their abilities so perfectly mimic, and in some cases
surpass, human ability. Not only can they play music or fight, they can also
monitor and correct people’s behavior. While some automata were wondrous

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

because of their exotic or foreign origins, others, in histories and legends of
European antiquity, were stunning incarnations of the cultural inheritance
that ruling dynasties in northern Europe sought to claim through the poets
who enjoyed their patronage.

The Hierarchy of Creation
The medieval image Natura artifex is based on a syncretic tradition of medieval neoplatonism. Three late antique authors in particular, Chalcidius (fl. ),
Macrobius (ca. –), and Boethius (ca. –), were most influential in
the development of medieval neoplatonism in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. A central principle of platonism is what C. S. Lewis called Plato’s “Principle of the Triad,” which found expression in Chalcidius’s commentary on
Plato’s Timaeus and in Macrobius’s Commentary on the Dream of Scipio. According to the Timaeus, Nature, which had been created by the divine craftsman (the Demiurge), translated the ideal world of forms into the sensible world,
for “it is impossible that two things should be joined together without a third.
There must be some bond in between both to bring them together.”  Nature
is the bridge between perfect, immaterial archetypes and the physical manifestations of those ideas. Chalcidius’s translation into Latin of part of the Timaeus and his extensive commentary on the entire work were the only major
Platonic texts available in the Latin West through much of the medieval period. His explanation of the Principle of the Triad was enormously influential
in the development of medieval Latin Neoplatonism. Chalcidius explained that
Nature is the intermediary between form and matter, and linked the triad of
form, nature, and matter to the Aristotelian classification of the three kinds
of creative endeavor: “For all things which exist are either the work of God,
or of Nature, or of a human artificer imitating Nature.” Macrobius, writing
slightly later, echoed this idea when he attributed the creation of physical bodies to what he called the “world-soul.” Natura takes forms or archetypes and
translates them into materiality, as in the artifex part of the metaphor.
Th is tripartite framework, as expressed by Macrobius and Chalcidius,
formed the basis for the medieval Neoplatonist movement, which was located
mainly at the Chartrian and Victorine schools in and around Paris in the twelfth
century. The earliest and most important of the works associated with this
movement was Hugh of St. Victor’s (–) Didascalicon. Hugh wrote the

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



didactic treatise in the late s at the newly founded monastery school at
the abbey of St. Victor. The Didascalicon, a guide to students, teaching them
what they should read, how they should read, and to what purpose, both in
the arts and in Scripture, is Hugh’s attempt to select the areas of knowledge
important to humanity, and to show how mastery of these subjects is crucial
to attaining spiritual perfection. The work is extant in over one hundred manuscripts, held in over forty-five libraries throughout Europe, in testament to
its philosophical and spiritual importance. In addition to being a practical
manual for students, and thus indicative of the rise of cathedral and monastery schools in the Île-de-France, the Didascalicon heralded the resurgence of
the philosophy of aesthetics, which had languished since John Scot Eriugena
(ca. –), the most influential philosopher of the Carolingian period and
the key figure in Neoplatonist philosophy and aesthetics between Macrobius
and Hugh of St. Victor. Medieval aesthetics reached a peak in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, due in part to an analysis of the arts (such as found in
the Didascalicon) and also to a foundation in Neoplatonism.
In the Didascalicon, Hugh presented a view of knowledge and creation
that followed the tripartite division first put forth by Plato. He divided knowledge into four types: theoretical (philosophy), practical (liberal arts), and mechanical (manual work), with logic providing the framework to assess the truth
and clarity of conclusions in the other three types of knowledge. Hugh granted
the mechanical arts more epistemological legitimacy than had earlier writers,
such as Cassiodorus, Isidore of Seville, and Bede, who viewed the mechanical
arts as indicative of the uses of mathematics. Because they were less important than the theoretical arts, the mechanical arts had never before been classified separately. The seven mechanical arts in Hugh’s taxonomy are
fabric-making (lanificium), arms (armatura), commerce (navigatio), agriculture
(agricultura), hunting (venatio), medicine (medicina), and theatrics (theatrica).
In addition to this trinitarian hierarchy of knowledge, Hugh also proposed a pyramid of kinds of things: eternal, perpetual, and temporal. The
first category— eternal—contains one thing: God. The eternal “has no distinct
cause and effect; it draws its existence not from something apart from it, but
from itself alone. Such alone is the progenitor and creator [artifex] of Nature.”
The second category—perpetual— also contains one thing: Nature. “Perpetual,” according to Hugh, refers to that thing in which its essence and its principle of existence are separate. Nature was created on a divine principle, yet has
no end, which is why it is called perpetual. The third category—temporal

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



    

things—“comprises those things which have both beginning and end and
which come into being not through themselves but as works of Nature.” Thus,
God is eternal and created Nature; Nature, in turn, is responsible for creating
all temporal things.
Each of these three kinds of things (eternal, perpetual, and temporal) has
a different kind of creative power: “the work of God, the work of Nature, and
the work of the artificer, in imitation of Nature.” God, eternal, creates ex
nihilo; Nature makes temporal things from templates (forms, in platonic parlance) created by God. Nature exists as an extrinsic, perpetual principle that
gives temporary existence to things in the sublunar realm through the movement of a “creative fire” that flows down to earth. Humanity, Nature’s creation, is temporal, and human creative endeavor is the third kind of work in
Hugh’s hierarchy: “the work of the craftsman is to unite things kept separate
or to disjoin those put together . . . for the earth cannot create the heaven, nor
can man, who is unable to add even an inch to his height, produce the herb.”
God creates both divine archetypes and Nature; Nature then uses these archetypes to create natural objects in the sublunary world. The human artificer, one of Nature’s creations, manufactures material objects in imitation of
natural forms. The artificer can create only composites of preexisting forms,
for anything he could possibly imagine is based on something that already
exists from Nature.
Hugh suggested that human work, however impressive, was always degraded. He called this creative work “not nature but imitative of nature; it is
called mechanical, that is to say, counterfeit, just as it is said that a key, secretly introduced, is called ‘mechanical.’ ” Hugh’s conflation of “counterfeit”
and “mechanical” may reflect a translation error from Greek to Latin in the
late ninth century. Martin of Laon, who had studied under John Scot Eriugena, directed the copying at Laon of a Latin-Greek thesaurus and has also
been credited as the author of another lexical text from Laon in this period,
the Scholica graecarum glossarum, a compilation of several hundred words, with
accompanying definitions and etymologies. According to Martin,
“Moechus” means adulterer, a man who secretly pollutes the marriage
bed of another. From “moechus” we call “mechanical art” any object
which is clever and most delicate and which, in its making or operation, is beyond detection, so that beholders find their power of vision stolen from them when they cannot penetrate the ingenuity of
the thing.

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



All mechanical art is intrinsically fraudulent, and it can blind one with its ingenuity.
Automata, such as the birds on the Throne of Solomon in Constantinople or in the Palace of the Tree in Samarra, are copies of natural objects and
would thus seem to be easily categorized in this period as the product of human craft. However, the distinction between Nature’s work and humanity’s
work was sometimes difficult to make, as the metaphor Natura artifex both
elevates human labor and diminishes Nature’s creative work. Several related
metaphors linking Nature’s work with craft, especially metalworking, were
repeatedly employed in Neoplatonist texts from late antiquity through the thirteenth century. Macrobius, in his Commentary on the Dream of Scipio, first
personified Nature as Natura artifex and compared the process of human reproduction to that of a coiner minting money. “Once the seed has been deposited in the mint where man is coined [the uterus], Natura artifex first begins
to work her skill upon it so that on the seventh day she causes a sack to form
around the embryo.” Hugh, familiar with Macrobius, also used the coining
metaphor, but to describe the maturation of the human mind rather than the
generation of the human body. He equated the human mind with metal that
then becomes a coin. Both the unformed mind of the infant and the lump of
metal become changed into something very different: the mature human intellect and the tangible power of the sovereign respectively. Both are created
in a similar manner: an undifferentiated lump of plastic material comes into
(violent) contact with a preexisting form, which gives its shape or contours to
the material. Once minted, the coin is no longer a piece of metal like any other.
It has a specific value, it can be exchanged for goods or ser vices, and, most
importantly, it represented in this period the power of the sovereign. Similarly, according to Hugh, the mind, by receiving the imprints of natural archetypes over the course of maturation to adulthood, is transformed from an
unshaped, plastic material into the human intellect. However, both the coin
and the human mind owe their existence to previously created external forms.
The fully formed and trained human intellect of an adult is different from the
pliable, merely receptive mind of an infant, but it is still only capable of viewing the world through previously seen archetypes.
Hugh influenced later Neoplatonist philosophers and theologians, especially Bernard Silvestris and Alain de Lille, both of whom used the metaphor
Natura artifex. Bernard and Alain were associated with the cathedral school
at Chartres, which represented the assimilation of several centuries of Neoplatonism from the early medieval period. Bernard Silvestris (fl. –),

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



    

the earlier of the two wrote Cosmographia (also known as De mundi universitate), a natural philosophical prosimetrum— alternating passages of prose and
classical meter—about the creation of the world. In it, Bernard personifies Nature as the “artisan who compounds bodies” for the souls provided by Endelechia, the world-soul. Although the Chartrian and Victorine schools were
seen by some contemporaries as rivals, their geographic proximity and similarity of purpose ensured that texts and ideas circulated fairly easily between
them. The Didascalicon was probably a source for Bernard, as Bernard’s definition of Nature is very similar to Hugh’s. A few decades later, Alain de Lille
(ca. –) established Nature an important character in his philosophical
poems De planctu naturae and Anticlaudianus, both written between 
and . As with his Neoplatonist predecessors, Alain employs the metaphor of Nature stamping or coining natural objects; in Anticlaudianus Nature coins people into species from matter. In De planctu, modeled on
Boethius’s Consolatio Philosophiae, the hammer and anvil are everywhere as
Alain extends the coining metaphor to speech and verbal expression: a man
who knows how to use grammar well is as much an artificer as one who works
with his hands. Alain also uses coining imagery to explain the creation of
people, as when he compares human generation to artisanal craftsmanship.
As Nature describes her role:
Me, therefore, He appointed as His deputy; a coiner for stamping the
types of things, so that I, minting the copies of things on the appropriate anvils, would not allow the shape to deviate from the shape of
the anvil, but that, through my skilled labor, the face of the copy would
in no aspect, defrauded by the endowments of any other elements,
deviate from the face of the exemplar.
The painting of Natura artifex, taken from a fifteenth-century manuscript
of Jean de Meun’s continuation of Guillaume de Lorris’ poem Le Roman de la
Rose, illustrates this extended metaphor of human generation. The image depicts Nature creating new people at her forge out of existing limbs and appendages. Jean de Meun drew heavily on ideas in Chartrian Neoplatonist texts,
especially De planctu. Nature (the creative impulse) works with Genius (sexual desire), to renew humankind in the face of mortality: “But when sweet
and compassionate Natura sees that envious Death and Corruption come to
destroy whatever they find within her forge, [she] continues always to hammer and forge and to renew the pieces with a new generation . . . . From these,

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



Art makes her examples, but does not make the forms as true.” Nature’s divine forms are true, but human art can only make imperfect copies.
The metaphor of Natura artifex runs in both directions, explaining natural and human creative work. Nature’s work is much more mysterious than
the work of the artificer, but it can only be explained and understood in the
language of human art. The metaphor is an attempt to explain her work to an
audience in recognizable terms, just as the author of Le Voyage de Charlemagne
compared Hugo’s palace to a rotating mill-shaft. Natura artifex describes Nature’s singular power to give material form to divine archetypes, yet the coining imagery, as well as the trope of Nature’s forge and anvil, evoke human art
and metalworking. However, Nature can make humans; the artificer can make
only a similitude. The image of Nature hammering together separated limbs
recalls Hugh’s assertion that the work of the artisan is “to bring together things
disjoined or to disjoin those put together.” Interestingly, the work of Natura
artifex is visually and verbally described as “forging,” a term that meant both
joining disparate things together and creating a counterfeit object intended
to deceive. The terms of human art, deployed in metaphor to explain Nature’s special and important creative role, carry with them the implication that
all manufacture is intrinsically debased. Human art is mechanical and mimetic, and it is the least impressive kind of creation, according to Hugh’s threefold hierarchy, as it is limited to making copies of natural forms. A builder gets
his ideas from mountains, while bark, feathers, and scales all provide inspiration for human clothing. However, although all examples of the mechanical
arts are necessarily counterfeit, the work of the fabricator can occasion amazement. “[Necessity] has devised all that you see most excellent in the work of
men. From this [necessity] have arisen the infinite varieties of painting, weaving, sculpting, and founding, so that we marvel [miremur] not only at Nature
but also at the artificer.” Human art is by definition mimetic and counterfeit, but it can still evoke wonder.

Magical Mimesis: The Language of Description
The terms used to describe automata and their makers betray the boundary
between the work of Nature and the work of the artificer, as they encompass
both craft knowledge, such as metalworking, and text-based knowledge,
such as astral science. Like the metaphor Natura artifex, descriptions of
automata and their creators combine artisanal imagery and references to

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



    

metalworking with allusions to more mysterious intellectual and creative
practices.
The language of automata and their creators in twelfth- and early
thirteenth-century texts, roughly contemporaneous with the philosophical and
didascalic texts discussed above, refers to elements of the human mimetic arts
as well as the more transformative arts of Nature. Although automata, especially in twelfth-century texts, are clearly mimetic, their mimesis inheres less
in a meticulous reproduction of material appearance (corresponding to human art) and more in principles of operation and behavior. This is a sympathetic mimesis, as it allows objects to tap into and use the power of the original
archetype, just as the minted coin takes on something of the power of the sovereign, rather than mere likeness. For example, Hugo’s palace, described in
the previous chapter, does not resemble the heavens in the same way that an
orrery models the celestial spheres, but, rotating around its central axis, the
palace in motion resembles the movement of the earth in a fundamental way.
Medieval automata are often characterized in terms that evoke lowly artisanal craft, yet their creators are often described as highly learned men, who
are able to draw on extensive natural knowledge. In the Voyage de Charlemagne,
the two automata that crown Hugo’s rotating palace are first described as “two
children, cast in copper and metal” and later as “images.” Figure, ymage, or
ymagete commonly denote automata throughout the medieval period. “Cast”
[tregeté], the word used to describe the automata at King Hugo’s fictional palace,
connects automata to artisanal work (metalworking) and to intellectual (and
verbal) endeavor (enchantment). In other texts, objects similar to Hugo’s
automata are “molded” [façonez], “gilded” [dorez], and most frequently, “cast
in metal” [tresgetez].
Yet the depictions of the creators of these automata suggest a more complex picture than an artisan working in a foundry. Automata rest on esoteric
knowledge, but instead of artisans (such as the makers of court spectacles and
Mystery Plays in the fifteenth century, who guarded their secrets) philosophers,
necromancers, and learned men create automata using astral science, enchantment, augury, or even necromancy. The range of possibilities, from studying
the quadrivium to trafficking with demons, runs the gamut from intellectually legitimate to maximally transgressive. These learned men attain their
knowledge after years of studying the liberal arts, including cumpas. Astral
science was part of the traditional arts education, and was employed in navigation, medicine, and for prediction. Other terms— enchantment, augury,
art (skilled human work), and necromancy—go beyond the boundary of the

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



liberal arts, and have in common the study and manipulation of natural phenomena, sometimes called “magic.” 
Broadly speaking, in the medieval period magic could be considered
either natural or demonic. However, these categories overlapped in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries and were often inextricably tangled, both in
theory and in practice. Natural magic rested on a naturally occurring sympathy between the celestial and sublunary spheres, and relied on the hidden
properties of natural substances or the fundamental structures of the universe.
However, demons, disembodied intelligences that could be malevolent, could
also manipulate natural laws and create stunning effects. A sorcerer using
demonic magic would summon a demon and force it to do his bidding.
The vocabulary for automata and their creators reflects this complicated
network of intellectual pursuits and activities. This semantic field indicates
that automata embody both the wonder that Hugh of St. Victor allows as well
as the inherently fraudulent nature of all mimetic art. Old French words relating to magic, most of which came originally from Latin, were used to describe different ways that natural knowledge could bring about par ticu lar
effects. The inflected vocabulary of magic testifies to the importance and precision of the categories of magic, at least at a theoretical level. Yet meanings
of these words also conflate the mastery of natural knowledge with practices
involving demons. For example, magie came from the Latin term magus, originally meaning a priest, and then came to be identified in the Latin traditions
with wisdom, sorcery, astral divination, and demons. The meaning of the verb
enchanter in this period encompasses singing, seduction, conjuring, and spell
casting. Augure referred to a pagan priest with specialized and even mystical
ability to discern favorable omens by reading bird flight or bird entrails, while
augurerie was more generally defined as foretelling future events through divination, scrying, or consulting signs (including avian signs). The Latin form of the
word nigromance—necromantia—is defined as either the act of divining through
animals or contact with the dead, or more generally magic or sorcery.
Two Latin terms, ars and ingenium, and their cognates in Old French,
encompass a range of objects, activities, and connotations, from the skillful
creator, as in Natura artifex, to possible demonic involvement in creating moving or speaking statues. Ars (Latin) and art (Old French) meant the learned
ability to do something, such as the art of medicine or the art of poetry. Art
could also mean the practice of magic or necromancy when it was modified
by those terms. Because “art” on its own could refer to many different kinds
of learned knowledge, it was frequently modified; for example, William of

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

Malmesbury said that Gerbert of Aurillac gained access to an underground
cache of treasure through “the familiar arts” of necromancy. From this root
one also finds the sense of profession or métier in the word artifex, usually
translated as “artisan,” or “artist,” and the pejorative connotation with deception in the word artifice. In Old French artifice has a range of meanings, from
admirable skill to sinister fraud: it meant one who worked as an artisan and a
creator who copied natural forms with the intention of fooling the senses. Related ideas of skill, fabrication, and fraud inherent in ars and art in this period
are paradoxically also found in its antonym, ingenium (engin in Old French),
which meant in classical and medieval Latin an innate talent or spirit, related
to the English “genius.” Engin was often used to refer to artificial, mimetic, selfmoving objects that seemed equally a product of art as of invention. Engin also
came to mean ruse or trickery, in much the same way as English “ingenious”
can sometimes mean “sly” or “crafty.” Likewise, words used to denote the creators of automata and the processes used to make them come from the same
root—engeignor or gaaignié. Related words in Old French from the same root
(engignant and engignart) carry meanings of deceit and diabolical trickery, as
well as artisanal skill and cunning. The Italian word ingegnere, which was
introduced into Old French in the late twelfth century and referred to an inventor of siege machinery, reinforced these dual meanings of artisanship and
artifice. Both engin and ingenium were used until the seventeenth century
to denote a manmade mechanical device, such as an automaton.

Amphiras’s Chariot, Vulcan’s Engine
A passage from Le Roman de Thèbes (–), an Old French roman composed
several decades after Hugh’s Didascalicon, clearly illustrates the complicated
semantic field involving fabrication, magical practices, intellectual ability, and
automata. The earliest of the romans antiques, a group of Old French poetic texts
that took the histories of Greece and Rome as their subject matter, the roman is
a vernacular retelling of Statius’s Thebaid, a Latin epic from the first century (ca.
). The matière—the subject—is the story of Oedipus and Thebes, and includes attempted infanticide, parricide, incest, self-mutilation, and ungrateful
children. The version of the Oedipus myth given at the beginning of the Roman de Thèbes is the first that a non-Latinate audience would have heard.
One major change between Statius’s version and that of the Thèbes-poet
is the addition of Adrastus, king of the Argives and enemy of the Thebans.

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



His ally, Amphiras, is a “very noble archbishop” and a valued counselor to
Adrastus. Knowledgeable in all the secrets of the heavens [cumpas, augurie],
Amphiras could cast lots and correctly interpret the results, bring the dead
back to life, and understand the “Latin” of birds. The commonplace in medieval literature of referring to the language of birds as Latin—the language
of scholarship—indicates that the interpretation of avian sounds or signs was
considered learned knowledge, rather than vernacular knowledge. The narrator assures the audience that “there is no better sorcerer under heaven.”
Amphiras has a magnificent war chariot with two musical automata
[ymages] on it. Vulcan had made the chariot and the images “with a great deal
of thought and over a long period of time.” That only Vulcan, a god, could
make the chariot and the automata demonstrates that these objects are fundamentally different from other kinds of manufactured objects. As I noted
earlier, Vulcan (or Hephaestus, as he is called in the Iliad) also made wheeled
metal servants to attend to the gods on Mount Olympus and two golden female servants to serve him in his workshop. For Amphiras’s chariot, Vulcan
wrought a model of the entire cosmos, and placed the nine celestial spheres,
along with the constellations, planets, and their movements on the chariot.
The central sphere, representing the earth and the sea, was decorated with lifelike paintings of men, beasts, fish, winds, and storms. Vulcan also wrought
the seven liberal arts and placed them on the back of the chariot: Grammatica with her divisions, Dialectica with arguments, Rhetorica with judgments,
Arithmetica holding an abacus, Musica with the scale, Geometria holding a
rod, and Astronomia an astrolabe. The two automata, young men or boys, cast
in metal [tresgetee], play music: one sounds the horn for the charge of Adrastus’s army, the other pipes “clearer than a lute or viol.”
The narrator describes the skills needed to make the chariot and the automata on it; both are explicitly linked to metalworking, through Vulcan, as
well as to the arts of magic and enchantment. This link is also seen in the term
tresgeter, which can, like its English counterpart “cast,” mean either the casting of objects in metal or the casting of spells, lots, dice, and enchantments.
Yet although the chariot and the automata were created in metal by Vulcan,
the description of how the chariot and automata are made has less to do with
the mechanical, artificial processes of smithing, and much more to do with
deliberative and learned knowledge that Vulcan uses. “[He] made [the chariot] with great skill and over a long period of time. After a long time spent in
study and deliberation, Vulcan placed the moon and sun on the chariot and,
using art and enchantment, cast the entire cosmos in metal.” These models

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

of the cosmos and of the terrestrial world are so accurate that they could be
used as teaching aids. This mimetic accuracy is represented as due at least as
much to the philosophical and magical knowledge of Vulcan as to his metalworking abilities. Twice the author emphasizes the counsel and study that Vulcan undertook while making the chariot; furthermore, the mention of all nine
celestial spheres and all seven liberal arts highlights the importance of intellectual endeavor. Vulcan’s labor, like Natura’s, can be described in artisanal
terms, but operates on a more philosophical level. Of course, both learned theoretical knowledge and learned craft knowledge were needed to manipulate
natural laws and phenomena. Study in the seven liberal arts, philosophy, and
the cosmos was necessary to understand and to control the forces of nature
and create automata. Knowing the properties of stones, plants, and metals connects sorcerers to artisans, while knowing how to read the heavens and devise
enchantments joins them to philosophers.

How to Make an Automaton
The authors of romance could not and did not give detailed descriptions of
how automata are made. Instead, they focused on the astounding and marvelous effects of automata, and described the creators of automata as scholars
and magicians. Making an automaton thus required understanding the science of the stars; familiarity with natural objects imbued with marvelous properties as well as confident and intimate knowledge of their powers; or the ability
to communicate with and control demons. In the literary texts of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, learned sages, wise philosophers, and sorcerers created automata using sympathetic magic, celestial forces, esoteric natural knowledge, or demons.
The Voyage de Charlemagne contains a description of Hugo’s palace, which
mimics the earth by harnessing the celestial forces. While the narrator does
not state who built the impressive palace, he does mention that it was built
using cumpas, and as there is no mention of any supernatural involvement, it
seems likely that the palace would have been understood to be built either by
Hugo himself (as Cosmocrator), or by learned men at his court. The bed
in Hugo’s palace where Charles spends the night had also been made by
cumpas; underneath it is the coign for Hugo’s spy. Given the moral outrage that
Charles and his retinue express upon learning that they had been spied upon,
cumpas here seems to have a morally negative valence, connoting not just dif-

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



ficult and highly specialized learning but also trickery and knowledge used
for dishonorable ends. Despite the luxury and rarity of the materials used to
build Hugo’s palace, artisanal skill is never mentioned. Both the palace and the
automata are less the result of human craft than the result of the mastery of
recondite and arcane knowledge used in ways not fully understood or morally
sanctioned. The author suggests an ontological distinction between the automata and the palace on the one hand, and the paintings, wall hangings,
and furnishings within the palace on the other; the mimesis of the latter derives from visual likeness to the natural exemplar, while the mimesis of the
former is sympathetic, and copies the original in movement and function.
The movement of the palace and the automata highlights this fundamental difference. If the wind strikes the palace on the western side, the palace
revolves around its central axis (the pillar), while the copper boys blow their
horns very loudly and laugh at each other “so you would swear they were really alive.” The wind also brings a terrible snow squall. Despite the violence of the storm, the palace rotates smoothly from west to east, just like the
earth, while inside the palace everything remains calm, “as in the summer
month of May when the sun shines.” Hugo, “wise, clever, and full of cunning,” has tamed elemental and celestial forces. Hugo has created an elaborate illusion of the cosmos: the palace moves, like the spheres, while, inside
the palace, everything appears stationary, like the earth. The automata could
be mistaken for humans or angels. The emphasis on both the corporeal and
the celestial links the automata, and by extension the palace, even more strongly
to natural forms (people) and divine creation (angels).
As the Franks’ reaction to the revolving palace and automata demonstrates,
contemporary Western audiences viewed automata and their creators with a
mix of wonder and suspicion. Initially impressed by the splendor of the palace, Charles and his knights become terrified when it begins to move, falling
to the ground and cowering in fear. The situation is comic— even satirical—
and Charles and his knights are the butts of the joke, while Hugo remains
unperturbed by the motion of his palace or the squall that rages outside. The
author describes the spinning palace and the automata in artisanal terms—
wheels and shafts— and part of the comedy may derive from the fact that
Charles and his entourage are taken aback by such mundane technology. Their
terror and confusion, especially compared to Hugo’s sangfroid, demonstrate
the disconcerting nature of the automata to those unfamiliar with them. This
anecdote signals both the wonder and the suspicion inherent in automata and
toward the people who make them.

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



    

Automata could be created in this period by means other than astral science. The occult, or non-manifest, properties of natural substances (such as a
magnet) might also be used to create automata. Hidden qualities were believed
to inhere in natural substances. These marvelous potencies could involve action at a distance (the lodestone), poison antidotes (the bezoar stone), or protection from harm (the caladrius bird, which, in its reaction to an ill person,
would convey the prognosis). Gemstones constitute the single largest group
of objects with non-manifest powers. They were used often in medical treatment, and their powers were listed in medieval lapidaries. Mastering the potential abilities and uses of gemstones or any other group of natural objects
required long and careful study of the works of ancient natural philosophers.
These hidden properties occurred naturally, as part of the customary variation
of nature throughout the world. These properties were most often the result of
celestial influences, as when the conjunction of certain planets would give
extra potency to a gemstone. William of Auvergne, writing slightly later in
the early thirteenth century, suggests a link between gems and celestial bodies:
[the planets] might be collections of lights in parts of heaven itself,
just as it appears among us in certain gems. For in fact I recollect
when I saw an emerald, which appeared, in its brilliance, as the most
luminous of three little stars. And this is true of the stone that is
called heliotrope, because it is itself a green stone, growing brilliant
red by means of a star.
The marvelous properties of natural substances could produce astonishing effects when controlled by those who understood their power. In two midtwelfth-century romans antiques, Le Roman d’Éneas (ca. ) and Le Roman
de Troie (ca. ), the cryptic potential of natural substances allows automata
to function. In Éneas, a retelling of Vergil’s Aeneid, the walls of Carthage are
built by cumpas (reflecting the amalgamation of knowledge dealing with the
mysterious and powerful) and made of marble and adamant (a very hard substance, either metal or gemstone), in order to withstand fierce attacks. Two
rows of magnets (lodestone) run along the tops of the wall to provide additional defense, presumably by interfering with the iron weapons of enemy
armies. Within the city walls the tomb of Camille the Amazon incorporates
a caladrius bird, carved marble, adamant, a magical mirror, a casket sealed
with mortar made from precious stones crushed and mixed with serpent’s blood,
an eternal lamp made from a carbuncle, and an automaton. A golden dove,

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



on a pillar, holds in its beak a golden chain, one end of which is attached to
the carbuncle. Across the room a golden archer stands sentry, bow bent and
arrow nocked, ready to let fly its arrow at the dove if the tomb is disturbed.
The archer could look long and hold the bow bent, but he would not
release the arrow unless the noose of a snare (designed for this purpose and that kept the bow always bent) were first disturbed. At a
breath all would be lost: if someone blew the snare it would trip the
bow immediately, and the archer would shoot at the dove and hit it,
breaking the chain and extinguishing the lamp.
Although the description of the mechanism of the automaton seems fairly
straightforward, at least to modern readers, its presence in conjunction with
the abundance of costly and magical objects in Camille’s mausoleum strongly
suggests its dependence on or at least association with occult properties. The
people responsible for the tomb were clearly learned in natural magic and philosophy, as shown by the many magical substances and objects used: the manipulation of those substances is the work of the scholar, not the artisan. That
same knowledge allowed those unknown, unseen philosophers to cast the archer and give it the power of movement.
Benoît de Sainte-Maure’s Roman de Troie (ca. ) contains even more
elaborate wonders. The Roman de Troie was the first written retelling of the
Trojan War in medieval Europe, and was based on two earlier Latin texts,
the fourth-century Ephemeris belli troiani by Dictys Credensis and the sixthcentury De excidio troiae historia by Dares Phrygius. The Chambre de Beautés (also called the Alabaster Chamber), where Hector is taken to convalesce
after sustaining battle wounds, is a fabulously decorated architectural marvel. The Chamber is made entirely of alabaster but without any kind of mortar or cement, and decorated with gilded doors and golden fi xtures.
In the Alabaster Chamber, where the gold of Arabia sparkles and the
twelve gemstones that God established as the most beautiful of all
when he named them “precious”— sapphire and sard, topaz, chrysoprase, chrysolite, emerald, beryl, amethyst, jasper, ruby, sardonyx, clear
carbuncle and chalcedony—these were to be found in the Chamber in
abundance. No other lamp was needed, for the Chamber on the darkest night is brighter than the brightest summer day. The windows are
made of green chrysoprase and sard and beautiful almandite, and the

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

frames are cast from the finest Arabian gold. I do not intend to tell
of the images, sculptures, statues, the paintings, nor of the various
marvels and tricks to be found there at various times, for it would be
tedious to listen to.
Yet the narrator goes on to describe the greatest marvels in the Chamber:
four life-sized human automata, beautiful as angels, made of gold and perched
on columns made of gems. The Chamber itself and all of the decorations, including the human figures, had been made by “three poets, wise teachers, who
were fluent in necromancy.” One of the figures, a young maiden, holds up a
mirror so that the inhabitants of the Chamber may see their honest reflection
and “know right away what was unpleasant in their dress; in no time at all
they could put things to rights and arrange their apparel more attractively.”
The second maiden, an acrobat, “all day long played and made jests and danced
and gamboled and tumbled and leapt on top of the pillar, so high up it is a
marvel she did not fall.” The two other automata are figures of young boys.
One sits on a throne made of obsidian, a stone believed to be beneficial to
health, plays every kind of instrument, and, with the help of two other automata, an eagle and a satyr, scatters fresh flowers on the floor of the Chamber twice a day. The other golden boy carries a censer, made with great
knowledge [grant esciënt], filled with aromatic gums and unguents which burn
but are not consumed, and which have “spiritual qualities, for there is no illness nor pain that is incurable once one has smelled it.” Equally important,
the same figure conveys confidentially to each person how his or her behavior is or is not courtly. “Here was proof of the most cunning skill: it was a
marvel that it could exist or how it could have been made,” exclaimed the
narrator.
Yet aside from marveling at the skill of these three wise men and the automata they have created, the author of romance can only describe the automata’s general appearance, thereby underscoring the fact that these automata
are fundamentally unlike other forms of human art. Instead of analyzing their
operation or causes, the emphasis is on what the automata can do: they can
juggle, or shoot, or play music, or act as perfect courtly servants. This paucity
of detail of the visual description of the automata contrasts with the level of
detail the authors of these romances provided when describing artifacts ordinarily made by engineers or artisans. The architecture of Camille’s tomb is
detailed over a hundred lines, and is clearly the poet’s ekphrastic triumph, an
elaborate compendium of the exotic and the bizarre:

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



The area was large and was paved with marble. There were four stones,
carved in the shape of lions, artfully situated. Above them were two
arched vaults, crossed, with a cornice above (like a canopy), completely
round. They [the vaults] were joined together in the center with great
skill. Above, over the jointure, was placed a beautiful pillar of multicolored marble. The base, which was set beneath it, was six fathoms
high. The base and the pillar were completely worked with flowers,
deer, and birds.
Likewise, Benoît gives a vivid description of the censer carried by one of the
automata. It was “made from a single large topaz, clear and costly, with finely
worked chains woven with golden wire.” Yet all the audience can learn of
the automata in Camille’s tomb or the Chambre de Beautés is that they are
made of gold or silver, are as beautiful as angels, and, in the case of the four
automata in the Alabaster Chamber, are gendered as male or female.
The descriptions of the automata in the romans antiques may reflect the
contemporary artistic practices in in Benoit’s milieu. The mid-twelfth century
saw the beginning of a new and independent visual art style, characterized by
an emphasis on natural forms and heightened naturalism, develop in Flanders and northern France, especially in Champagne. This new style flourished in metalwork, especially gold and gilded copper. Large objects, such as
monstrances, reliquaries, and coffers, were worked in enameled gold and inlaid with gems, and were embellished with intricate detail.
Illuminated manuscripts of history and romance for the luxury market
were produced in France beginning in the fourteenth century, and were most
often found in the collections of nobles and courtiers. Because authors did
not give clear and exact descriptions of what automata looked like, manuscript
painters had license to depict them in different ways. The depictions of the
automata in Plates  and  are from two different northern French manuscripts
completed in the second half of the fourteenth century. The automata in the
Chamber are shown in two different guises: Plate  shows them as human figures on bedposts, while in Plate  they are clothed in the same manner as people, yet with wings and halos to emphasize their angelic beauty.
In neither plate do the automata bear any resemblance to machines, demonstrating that they were not thought of in mechanical terms. In Plate , each
automaton holds or has near it something to identify its purpose in the text:
one holds a mirror, one tosses knives, one is pointing, and one scatters flowers,
with a bird and satyr nearby. The automata in Plate  are very pale, evoking

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

marble statuary, and they are smaller than the five people in the room. In this
instance, the artist has portrayed the automata as secondary and markedly
different from the people in the image. The painter has also obliquely commented on their striking nature: one of the human figures in the room stares
at the automata, while her companions are focused wholly on Hector. The
automata in Plate  are life size, wear clothes, and are represented with hair
and skin that makes them appear to be flesh-and-blood beings. However,
three have wings, and one figure, the musician, has a halo; these mark them
as angelic. The difference between the descriptions of automata and craft objects reflects the differences of status and ontology between the two kinds of
things. The censer carried by one of the automata in Le Roman de Troie is an
object of wonder because of the beautiful craftsmanship and the rarity and
size of the stone, while the automaton itself embodies more difficult and extensive knowledge, and is wonderful because of the mystery of its creation.
As I briefly introduced earlier, in addition to natural philosophy and astral science, demonic assistance could also be used to create automata. Demons were believed to be disembodied intelligences that could trick and tempt
Christians into sin. Equipped with superhuman powers, they could not entirely break the rules of nature, but could bend them significantly. Only God
could stop time or cause something to occupy two places at once, but demons
could move extremely quickly or appear to be in several places at once. They
also had foreknowledge and could reveal it to humans under the right circumstances. Theoretically, summoning and controlling demons was part of the
ars magia (magical arts), a phrase that referred to controlling the forces of nature to affect future events, but not to scientia divinationis (the science of prediction), the knowledge of how to read and interpret signs and commentaries.
Suspicion and condemnation accrued more to practitioners of the former than
of the latter, although both knowing the future and controlling the outcome
of future events negated free will and aped divine prerogative. However, authors of romance, among others, often blurred this conceptual distinction between reading signs of nature and the heavens and changing the future.
Automata, when understood as moved or inhabited by demons, were seen
as strikingly similar to pagan idols. On one hand, the idol-maker is cursed in
Deuteronomy as an abomination, as is the “work of the hands of artificers.”
The Hebrew Scriptures explicitly condemn the making of graven images, stating “no man can make a god like to himself.” According to St. Augustine,
one of the main authorities on demons throughout the Christian medieval
period, “of course a demon bound to a statue [simulacro] by the wicked art of

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



man is a god for the man who made it, but not for all men.” Creators of
automata, therefore, were often viewed with suspicion, as they could easily slip
into the category of idolators, and their creations could be seen as idols. The
link between idols and heretical or un-Christian peoples compounded the suspicion surrounding automata and their creators.
Demonically animated automata appear in some medieval romances and
texts, though not in any of the romans antiques. In the early thirteenth-century
noncyclic Old French prose Lancelot do lac (ca. ), Lancelot encounters Doloreuse Garde, a forbidding castle guarded by a number of copper knights,
including “a gigantic marvelous copper knight made by enchantment” [chevalier de cuivre grant et merveilleus par anchantement]. After defeating the
metal guardians outside the castle, Lancelot goes inside and finds two more
copper knights guarding a chamber. He challenges and eventually defeats these
automata and enters the room, where he meets a young woman, also made of
copper, holding the keys to the enchantments [anchantemenz] in her hand.
Lancelot uses the keys to open a box nearby; inside it are thirty copper tubes,
each of which voices horrible cries. Upon opening the box, a whirlwind appears and a noise so loud that it “seems as if all the devils from hell were there,
and in fact they were devils.” He swoons, he sleeps; upon awakening, he discovers the copper damsel sunk into the ground and the copper knights at the
door broken into pieces. Entrapped and controlled by the absent author of the
enchantments, the demons are the animating force of the automata. Once their
power is broken, the automata can no longer function.
The demonic aspect of the automata appears in several manuscript paintings of Lancelot do lac (Plates –): all three are from different French manuscripts from the fifteenth century. In all three paintings, the copper knights
have bodies similar to human shape and do not wear any clothing. Their nakedness marks them as less than fully human, as they are uncivilized and have
no shame. In Plates  and , the automata are shown with genitalia, and in
Plate  they also are depicted with pubic and armpit hair. In Plate , the automata have beards and long hair, and look like wild men. It is possible that
the artist has chosen to depict the copper knights in this manuscript as wild
men in order to allude to Lancelot’s several psychotic breaks and his retreat
from courtly society to live as a recluse. The facial characteristics are also
not human in Plates  and . In a striking irony, Lancelot, the human hero,
is completely covered in metal from head to toe. None of his features are visible, nor does he display any sexual characteristics. Despite their recognizable
human form, the automata are not recognizably human. Their nakedness

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

is a sign of debasement; this and their bestial faces mark them as inhuman.
Compare these frightening creatures with the automata in the Chambre des
Beautés, in which the automata, created by natural magic, have clothes, halos, and wings. In both instances the automata are distinctly different from
humans, a difference that could result from both the morally and intellectually illegitimate knowledge of their creators.
The early thirteenth-century prose continuation of Chrétien de Troyes’s
Perceval contains a similar example of a demonic automaton. A cursed castle
shelters a copper bull with a demonic oracle trapped inside. Perceval, on arriving, forces the fifteen hundred people in the castle to run the gauntlet between
the copper men that guard the door with hammers. Everyone dies, except for
thirteen souls who agree to believe in God. Once these thirteen agree to convert, the demon escapes from the bull with a noise like a thunderclap and the
bull melts away. The link between automata, demons, and un-Christian belief
is evident in this example. The Christian hero breaks the enchantment and saves
thirteen people (recalling Jesus and his apostles) who convert to Christianity.
Literary and visual depictions of fictional automata in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries vividly illustrate that they were understood as the products
of esoteric, difficult intellectual knowledge, expressed variously as the products of sympathetic, natural, or demonic magic. The descriptions of the men
who created them—wise men, fluent in philosophy and necromancy— and
the methods they used further show that these creators do not operate in the
same manner as the artifex. Automata appear in literary forms like the chanson de geste and the roman as the embodiment of the challenge to Nature’s
divinely given agenda by philosophers, sorcerers, and poets. They are more troubling and more impressive than other kinds of mimetic art: they can move,
speak, perceive, and fight; they can terrify and delight; they can interact with
and respond to the human viewer.

Liminal Objects
The automata in the “literature of entertainment” elicit wonder in different
ways. They are rare, even singular, objects. They are often highly beautiful
or decorated, or are made of precious metals, and appear in exotic settings.
They also highlight and confound ontological distinctions, such as natural/
artificial, as discussed earlier. In these texts, humanoid automata often perform a disciplinary function. Their ability to surveil, guard, and punish people

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



is as astonishing and marvelous as either their aesthetic value or the mystery of
their creation.
The four golden automata in Benoît’s Chambre des Beautés enforce aesthetic and behavioral codes of the court. The Chamber contains everyone in
Trojan courtly society, and there are strict unspoken social codes of dress and
behavior. The automata help the Trojan nobility behave appropriately, and “they
were more sure and less anxious because of it. People were hardly ever mocked
or accused of behaving foolishly.” The first maiden, holding the mirror,
allows people to correct their outward appearance, making sure that their
hair, brooches, and raiment are all correct and tidy. The second maiden, by
performing acrobatic feats and conjuring, captivates the Trojan nobility, and
prevents them from leaving the Chamber before the correct time. “It is difficult for anyone to leave the Chamber while the image is conjuring tricks, as it
stands on the pillar.” One of the young male automata plays music to put
the audience in a courtly frame of mind, and to provide privacy for conversation. “When those in the Chamber were talking, sleeping, or keeping watch
none could hear the music and remain in low spirits or feel pain. People in
the Alabaster Chamber are not gripped by foolish ideas, unpleasant thoughts,
or ridiculous desires. The music benefits the listeners, for they can talk aloud,
and none can overhear.” Last, the inhabitants are forewarned against any
other lapses in gesture or deed by the fourth figure.
It would watch over the Chamber and, using signals, demonstrate to
each person what he should do and the necessary action: it would
make these things known without other people perceiving it. Even if
in the Chamber there were seven hundred people, each one would
truly know what the figure was showing him he most needed to do.
What it showed was completely secret: no one else could know it,
not I nor anyone else other than the person it was meant for. Here is
proof of the most extraordinary invention: It was a marvel that it could
exist and none could tell how it could have been made. None could
be in the Chamber any longer than he ought to be; the figure clearly
show when it was time to leave, and when it was too soon, and when
it was too late; it would often take note of this. It prevented on the
part of all in the Chamber, and all who entered or left it, behavior
that was boorish, uncouth, or rash. It was not possible to be foolish
or rude or irresponsible because the figure skillfully guarded all
against uncourtly behavior.

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

More important, the automaton conveys this to everyone confidentially, so
that no one loses face at court.
Automata also enforce boundaries more literally, as in Lancelot do lac and
the continuation of Perceval, in which copper knights patrol the entrances to
castles and rooms within castles. Likewise, in Le Roman d’Alexandre (ca. )
two golden boys garrison a bridge in the Bois des Puceles against Alexander
and his army.
At the other end of the bridge there were, cast in metal, two boys
made of fine gold. One was tall and thin, the other short and fat;
their limbs were well made, their faces pleasant. When the army approached and [the two boys] heard the cries, each seized a hammer to
block the passage. Above them, two inscriptions drawn up by a cleric
proclaim that they were made by augury [augure] to defend the passage. (Plates –)
In both the manuscript paintings shown here, the figures are armed with
hammers. In Plate  it is difficult to tell that the guardians are not real people, as they are shown with hair and wearing clothes. The second painting
(Plate ), also from a fourteenth-century manuscript, has a diapered background of red, blue, and gold, against which the automata have been rendered
in gold leaf, matching the description in the text. The automata have golden
faces and hair and do not wear clothes (there is a barely visible penis on the
lower of the two golden figures). In this image, Alexander appears to have already made progress across the bridge, as one automaton is sprawled on the
ground. In other instances, automata not only enforce physical boundaries,
but also social ones. In the Continuation de Perceval, two gold and silver figures safeguard the tent of Alardin, a knight from a distant land. One “holds
a spear in his hand and does not allow a churl [viliain] to enter.” The other
figure, holding a harp, bars the entrance to women who are no longer maidens. “If a maiden has been deflowered . . . the harp sounds discordantly and
its strings break.” In this case, the automata secure a physical boundary (an
entrance) and also uphold class distinctions and behavioral standards.
In literary examples in which automata watch over the resting places
of the dead, they patrol and enforce spatial and behavioral boundaries.
The archer guarding Camille’s vault in Éneas, mentioned above, is only one
example. Le Roman d’Alexandre contains a description of the crypt of the
“emir of Babylon,” which is also protected by two metal automata, copper chil-

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



dren in this case. “They both held shields of gold that were very heavy and
gave each other great blows with their iron pikes; like two champions they
faced each other. After those responsible for the enchantment had departed,
nothing and no one alive could enter.” By securing spaces consecrated to
the dead and enforcing the sanctity of those places, automata ensure that
certain moral and religious rules are upheld; for example, that the resting
places of the dead not be desecrated, disrupted, or robbed. In the examples
from twelfth- and thirteenth-century vernacular literature discussed in this
chapter, automata are human-like objects, but they are not human. Yet they
interact with people and enforce human social boundaries and norms. It is
unsurprising, then, that their creators are not represented as mere artisans,
but instead as learned men adept in sorcery, and enchantment.

Ancient Marvels
Automata play a significant role in twelfth- and early thirteenth-century French
romance. In some instances, such as the automata at Alardin’s tent in Perceval,
the boys guarding the tomb of the emir of Babylon and Hugo’s rotating palace and angelic automata, they reinforce the connection automata have to the
world beyond the boundaries of Latin Christendom. In many literary examples, automata are made using foreign knowledge, or are found in foreign lands,
where marvels flourished. It is possible that Hugo’s palace in Le Voyage de Charlemagne was based on contemporary descriptions of the actual Constantinople. Byzantine automata may have already familiar to some Latin Christians
from Liudprand’s account in the tenth century. Furthermore, twelfth-century
Constantinople had a pair of musical statues over the Boukoleon Gate. The
central hall of Hugo’s fictional palace, with its many windows and rich furnishings, may be based on the Chrystotriclinos (supposedly built by Constantine), and the Triclinos of the Nineteen Beds (attested to in the tenth-century
Byzantine handbook to courtly practice, De ceremoniis), two banquet halls in
Constantinople. In the romans antiques—Le Roman de Thèbes, Éneas, and
Le Roman de Troie— automata are wonders from the distant past. However,
in these settings of antiquity, automata also become part of the classical heritage of the ruling dynasties of Latin Christendom. In the second half of the
twelfth century, French and Anglo-Norman writers began to retell ancient texts
such as the Aeneid and the Thebaid in vernacular languages and adapt these
myths and epics to foundational stories of France and Anglo-Norman

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



    

England. By including automata in these romances, the French and AngloNorman authors, and their patrons, could claim automata as part of their
cultural patrimony.
The romans antiques were composed in an Anglo-Norman milieu, possibly for Henry II Plantagenet. Authors conjoined classical settings and plots
with courtly ideals and aesthetics that resonated with the courtly audience of
these works. The ancient legends of Thebes, Troy, and Rome were ideally suited
to origin myths of nobility and empire. The medieval tendency to claim noble descent from Trojan nobility went back as early as the seventh-century legend that the Franks were descended from Francio, a survivor of the Trojan
War. This legend was widely repeated and elaborated upon in the courtly
literature of the mid-twelfth century. The Roman de Thèbes, the earliest of
the romans antiques, appears frequently in manuscripts with the Roman de Troie.
Manuscript evidence demonstrates that medieval writers and audiences understood a causal link between the outcome of the siege of Thebes and the
later fall of Troy, and often combined these two narratives into a continuous
narrative of Trojan history in manuscript codices. The legends of Troy and
Aeneas were similarly yoked, as the Aeneid recounts how Aeneas, a Trojan survivor of the conflict, became the legendary founder of Rome. Furthermore,
both the poet and his subject matter were inextricably tied to histories of nobility and empire: the Aeneid treats of the foundation of the Roman Empire,
as told by Vergil, the author of imperial epic. The origin myth of Rome, retold for an Anglo-Norman courtly society in Éneas, was significant to the
Anglo-Norman lay elite, as Aeneas’s great-grandson Brutus was believed to
have settled in and founded Britain.
Romans antiques allowed French and Anglo-Norman nobility to claim the
cultural, technological, and intellectual achievements of these ancient dynasties. Automata, emblematic of these achievements, figure prominently in these
accounts. This historical narrative, which linked Troy and Rome to the ruling dynasties of the medieval Latin West, provided an alternative to the narrative of geographic specificity and natural philosophy outlined in Chapter .
French and Anglo-Norman writers, such as Benoît, conjoined the matière of
historical epics with wonder-provoking magical artifacts and automata. By inserting automata into these stories of nation-building, which had been reinvented to reflect the territorial and political aspirations of the French and
Anglo-Norman elites, the authors claimed these marvels as culturally legitimate, despite the fact that just how these objects were made could rest on im-

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



pious knowledge. These automata became part of the Trojan-Roman heritage
of the Anglo-Norman and French courts.
Several decades after the romans antiques first appeared, French and AngloNorman clerics further tightened the bonds between the nobility and automata by inscribing automata into the biography of Vergil. Beginning in the
mid-twelfth century, Vergil became a subject of Anglo-Norman clerical writers. These men wrote in Latin, in the genres of natural history and encyclopedia. Both the Latin and vernacular texts about Vergil derived from the Vergilian
corpus and commentaries. Contemporaneously with the composition of the
romans antiques, Vergil’s reputation as a magus acquired new dimensions.
However, it was not until after the romans antiques that he was also credited
as an automaton-maker. The earliest medieval version of Vergil as a sorcerer
appears in the Policraticus (ca. ), by John of Salisbury, a bishop, courtier,
diplomat, and classicist, and addressed to his patron, Thomas à Becket, the
archbishop of Canterbury. According to John, Vergil was the “Mantuan seer”
[uates Mantuanus]. He created an apotropaic bronze fly that kept real flies away,
among other wonderful objects.
There are other accounts of Vergil’s legendary magical powers in the decades after the Policraticus, but no further mention of automata until Alexander Neckam’s De naturis rerum (ca. s). Neckam was, like John of
Salisbury, an Anglo-Norman cleric. Furthermore, Neckam was even closer to
the Plantagenet court than John of Salisbury, as Neckam and Richard I “the
Lionheart” of England were foster-brothers. According to Neckam, the best
school in the Roman Empire had been Vergil’s school at Naples. In a long
account of the things Vergil, again referred to as “the Mantuan seer,” accomplished with his genius, Neckam includes eliminating poisonous leeches by
using a golden leech, similar to the bronze fly mentioned by John of Salisbury; creating a special concoction of herbs at the entrance to the butchers’
market that would keep meat fresh for five hundred years; and erecting a bridge
made of air which would transport him wherever he wished to go. The most
amazing of Vergil’s creations, according to Neckam, was the Salvatio Romae,
an elaborate alarm system for the entire Roman Empire, which operated with
multiple automata. Neckam describes the palace Vergil had built in Rome, in
which he placed a wooden statue. The statue, representing the empire, held a
bell in its hand, and would ring the bell whenever a province threatened revolt. At the same time, a bronze knight on a bronze horse on the roof of the
palace would point a spear in the direction of the rebellious province, so that

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

the emperor could send troops to restore the province to order. Neckam does
not give further comment on the Salvatio Romae or on how it worked. Given
Vergil’s reputation as the poet who celebrated the foundation of Rome, it is
not surprising that Neckam credited him with creating an alarm system to
keep the empire intact.
Two decades after Alexander Neckam listed the Vergilian wonders, including the Salvatio Romae, Gervase of Tilbury mentioned similar marvels in
his Otia imperalia. Gervase was, like Neckam, from the Anglo-Norman nobility. Trained as a canon lawyer, he was a courtier at the courts of King Henry
II of England; William of Champagne, the archbishop of Rheims; and Otto
IV, the Holy Roman Emperor. He repeats John of Salisbury’s story of the fly
that Vergil made “by mathematical magic” [arte mathematica] to keep the flies
out of Naples. Gervase also repeats, with slight variations, Neckam’s account
of Vergil’s solution to the problem of rotting meat. He also attributes to Vergil a bronze trumpeter—made by astral science—that kept the noxious vapors and ashes of Mt. Vesuvius from blowing over Naples.
Also there was a bronze image [ymago] holding a trumpet to its
mouth. Whenever the south wind opposed it and entered [the trumpet], the breath of the wind reversed immediately. Now what
benefit did that reversal of Notus [the wind] convey? Listen. A high
mountain borders the city of Naples, next to the sea, overlooking the
Terra di Lavoro spread out far and wide below it; in the month of
May this mountain belches noxious smoke, and occasionally spits out
burnt embers the color of coal and burning cinders; because of this,
men assert that a vent of terrestrial hell blows from there. Therefore,
when Notus blows, a searing dust scorches the cornfields and all the
fruit, and thus the most fertile earth is made barren. Because of
this, considering the whole region’s loss, Virgil erected the statue
with the trumpet on the opposite mountain (as we have said), so
that at the first breath of wind the horn sounded and the wind,
blowing against that same tube [of the trumpet], entered it; Notus,
confused and repulsed, would be beaten back by the strength of
astral science [mathesis].
It seems that Gervase may have based his account of the trumpeter on a
similar one by Conrad of Querfurt, written slightly earlier. In a letter from
, Conrad mentions that Vergil had made, among other things, an archer

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

Between Art and Nature



that faced Mt. Vesuvius and kept it from erupting. This device worked until
an idiot decided to release the arrow, which then shot into Vesuvius, causing
the volcano to begin erupting again. Conrad’s archer and Gervase’s bugler
resemble the trumpeters on King Hugo’s palace, as well as other examples of
guardian automata, commonly archers or buglers, in twelfth-century AngloNorman historical accounts (such as William of Malmesbury), and midtwelfth-century romances (for example, Éneas). In this instance, Vergil
creates, through astral science, an automaton that uses the natural power of
the wind to confound Nature and safeguard Naples.
It is remarkable that automata were attributed to Vergil only after they
appeared in the romans antiques of a few decades earlier. Anglo-Norman and
French poets and clerics in the twelfth century drew from similar source material, and clerics and courtiers at court would have been familiar with the
romans antiques. In the romans antiques automata are written into the past, as
part of the ancient heritage of the nobility, and are credited to men with skills
in divination, philosophy, and even poetry (or enchantment). Romans antiques,
based in part on the Aeneid, claim Roman or Trojan lineage for their French
and Anglo-Norman noble audiences. The romans antiques were staged in a literary past that was heavily inflected by contemporary twelfth-century courtly
society. Automata in romans antiques are part of the pageantry of the courts
from which the French and Anglo-Norman nobility claimed descent. Writers
of compendia, encyclopedias, and other nonfictional Latin prose translated
automata from the literary matière, based on Vergil and recomposed in the
romans antiques, and reinscribed them into the Vergilian legend and the Roman past, in the way that the authors of vernacular romance had earlier translated Vergil’s epic of empire to France and the Anglo-Norman realm.
Vergil’s ability to create automata rested, for the twelfth- and thirteenthcentury authors, on his reputation as a seer and his knowledge of magic and
the quadrivium. This echoes the descriptions of automaton-makers in vernacular literature from the same period. Automata, in these texts, are very particular objects. They are often extremely beautiful, and sometimes terrifying.
In some instances, they have the power of perception and discernment. In others, they have extraordinary physical capabilities, as warriors, musicians, or
entertainers. These objects, although artificial, are very different from other
kinds of technology and craftsmanship. These creations appear to be impossible to make by artisanal means only, although they resemble other kinds of
artisan-wrought objects in their material, and are presented as resting on a
foundation of esoteric knowledge. The metaphor of Natura artifex explains

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM



   

the mysterious work of Nature in recognizable terms, in much the same way
that Liudprand compared the unfamiliar Throne of Solomon to a familiar wine
press. Both the metaphor and Liudprand’s comparison are an attempt to grasp
the strange and make it known. But descriptions of automata and their creators demonstrate the ontological distinction between golden courtiers and
musical statues, on one hand, and a wine press or a mill wheel, on the other.
The latter are the work of the artisan, while the former are closer to the work
of Nature.

Brought to you by | New York University Bobst Library Technical Services
Authenticated
Download Date | 7/12/15 3:41 PM

