The prefaces of many books are more enduring than the
letter-press they introduce. It is as if an author's after-thoughts
more nearly express his real thoughts than his well-considered,
neatly planned succession of chapters. The reason for this,
though a natural one, came to me only as I read and re-read the
proofs of "The Thirty-six Dramatic Situations": as an author's
work is unrolled before him in the type of the galley-proofs,
the first sight of the printed words induces a freshness of mind
that is near relative to the fine frenzy of first conception; added
to this mental freshness there is a maturity —for are not months
of thought behind the chapters of the work ? —that makes the au
thor's thoughts as grandparents with the enthusiasms of youth.
In the prefaces, then, the authors find outlets to express their
own reactions to their own thoughts.
I have been step-father to Miss Lucile Ray's translation of
George Polti's book.
My own vague notions of the text,
gained by awkward concentration and persistent use of Spiers
and Surenne, became clear ideas as I read page after page of
Miss Ray's manuscript. As my understanding of Polti's analy
ses and classifications grew I thought I perceived the need for
an introduction that might help to convince authors, and those
other readers, not authors, who are likely to find Polti's work
suggestive, of the practical value of the work, and the need to
read it slowly, and contemplatively; if Situation is compared
with Situation, as the reading progresses, I thought, the real
value of the work will become evident.
I had not finished the
first reading of Miss Ray's translation, however, before I real
ized that Polti's book would need no recommendation. I must
add, then, that I write this Foreword merely because these two
pages, in the last section of the book to go to press, would look
unseemly if not clothed in print!
Certain of my thoughts, as I read proof after proof of the
book, may prove stimulating.
Polti nowhere tells what he
means by a Dramatic Situation.
In the Conclusion of the book
he makes it very clear, however, that he believes in the inven

tion of plot, the building up of incident upon incident, to make
a story, which, likely as not, serves only to enable the author
to use his plot; Polti seems to scorn the artistic use of plot
to interest readers in the expression of the author's outlook on
or opinion of a certain aspect of a moral issue. I have tried to
find words to express what I understand as a dramatic or story
situation. Tentatively I offer it that a situation results, in the
course of action of a story or a play, when the characters are
brought together, as a logical outcome of preceding incidents of
qualities are proved to
the story, so that their contrasting
readers, and the central character is faced with a decision to
be made, or a change to be suffered, or an obstacle to be over
come, and an end that the reader or spectator desires, or antici
pates, or dreads, is made imminent.
It also came to me as I pondered some of Polti's sub-classi
fications, that often the business of the story maker, and some
times the* art of the story artist, consists in making the inex
plicable seem explicable! As a corollary I wondered if art in
story writing and play writing does not consist in the arrange
ment of facts or incidents, which may or may not have any
basis in actuality, in order to convey to readers a notion of
the author's that either changes or emphasizes the moral atti
tude of the reader toward the universe.
I must offer a word of sympathy to the few readers who
expect to find in this book a list of plots — such a list as would
make needless the use of one's power of invention or one's im
agination. Polti's work is more than the list of plots you hoped
to find: it is a thought engine, an engine that even Goethe and
Gozzi would have used to burnish their conceptions of life, and
the possible complexities of human existence.
If you came to
"The Thirty-Six Dramatic Situations" to find a story readymade, I beg you stay to have your wits sharpened
and your
power of invention stimulated.
The work to which Polti refers in the Conclusion, "The Laws
of Literary Invention," has not yet been published. I hope that
when France has served civilization to the full, Polti may be
living to finish this other book.
WILLIAM R. KANE.
Ridgewood, New Jersey,
December

1st, 1916.

INTRODUCTION
that
maintained
"Gozzi
there can be but thirtysituations.
tragic
s i x
Schiller took great pains
to find more, but he was

unable to find even so
many as Gozzi."

Thirty-six situations only! There is, to me, some
thing tantalizing about the assertion, unaccompanied

as it is by any explanation either from Gozzi, or from
Goethe or Schiller, and presenting a problem which it
does not solve. For I remembered
that he who
declared by this limited number so strongly synthetic
a law, had himself the most fantastic of imaginations.
He was the author, this Gozzi, of "Turandot," and of the
"Roi Cerf," two works almost without analogue, the
one upon the situation of the "Enigma,"
the other
upon phases of metempsychosis; he was the creator
of a dramatic system, and the Arabesque spirit, through
him transfused, has given us the work of Hoffmann,
Jean-Paul Richter and Poe.
The Venetian's exuberance would have made me
doubtful of him, since, having once launched at us this
number 36, he kept silence. But Schiller, rigid and
ardent Kantian, prince of modern aestheticians, master
of true historic drama, — had he not in turn, before ac-

10

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

v

cepting this rule, "taken great pains" to verify it (and
the pains of a Schiller!) thereby giving it the addition
al authority of his powerful criticism and his rich
memory? And Goethe, his opposite in all things save
a strong taste for the abstract, — Goethe, who through
out his life seems to have considered the subject, adds
his testimony years after the death of Schiller, years
after their fruitful conversations, at the very time
when he was completing "Faust," that supreme combi
nation of contrasting elements.
In France, Gerard de Nerval alone had grasped and
presented briefly the ensemble of all dramatic produc
tion, in an article upon Soumet's "Jane Grey," in
"L' Artiste," — written, unfortunately, with what dandy
ism of style ! Having early desired to know the exact
number of actions possible to the theater, he found, he
His basis, however, is far from
tells us, twenty-four.
Falling back upon the outworn classifi
satisfactory.
cation of the seven capital sins, he finds himself obliged
at the outset to eliminate two of them, gluttony and
sloth, and very nearly a third, lust (this would be
Don Juan, perhaps). It is not apparent what man
ner of tragic energy has ever been furnished by ava
rice, and the divergence between pride (presumably the
spirit of tyranny) and anger, does not promise well
for the contexture of drama, the manifestations of
the latter being too easily confounded with those of
Furthermore, murder or homicide, which he
envy.
indicates as a factor for obtaining several new situa
tions, by uniting it in turn with each of the others,
cannot be accepted as such, since it is but an accident
common to all of them, possible in all, and one most
frequently produced by all. And finally, the sole title
mentioned by Nerval, "Rivalry of Queen and Subject,"
corresponds, it will be observed, only to a sub-class of
one, not of his twenty-four, but of Gozzi's Thirty-six
Situations.

INTRODUCTION

.

11

Since Nerval, no one has treated, in Gozzi's genuine
ly technical manner, of the secrets of invention, unless
it be relevant to mention in this connection Sarcey's
a theory
celebrated theory of the "scene-a-faire,"
in general but ill comprehended by an age which dreads
didacticism, — that is to say, dreads any serious reflec
tion upon art ; some intimate notes of Dumas fils which
were published against his wishes, if my youthful
memories are correct, in the "Temps" some years ago,
and which set forth that double plot of Corneille and
Racine, a heroine disputed by two heroes, and a hero
disputed by two heroines ; and, lastly, some works here
and there by Valin, upon composition. And that is all,
absolutely all.

I

rediscovered the thirty-six situa
tions, as Gozzi doubtless possessed them, and as the
reader will find them in the following pages ; for there
were indeed, as he had indicated, thirty-six categories
which I had to formulate in order to distribute fitly
among them the innumerable dramas awaiting classi
fication. There is, I hasten to say, nothing mystic or
cabalistic about this particular number; it might per
haps be possible to choose one a trifle higher or lower,
but this one I consider the most accurate.
Now, to this declared fact that there are no more
than thirty-six dramatic* situations, is attached a
singular corollary, the discovery that there are in life
but thirty-six emotions. A maximun of thirty-six emo
tions, — and therein we have all the savor of existence ;
there we have the unceasing ebb and flow which fills
human history like tides of the sea; which is, indeed, the
very substance of history, since it is the substance of
humanity itself, in the shades of African forests as

Finally, in brief,

*I

replaced the word "tragic", used in the quotation,
with "dramatic".
Those familiar with Goethe know that for
him — one of the "classic" Germans — the two terms were synony
mous in this passage.
have

12

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Unter den Linden- or beneath the electric lights of the

Boulevards; as it was in the ages of man's hand-tohand struggle with the wild beasts of wood and moun
tain, and as it will be, indubitably, in the most infinite
ly distant future, since it is with these thirty-six emo
tions — no more —that we color, nay, we comprehend,
cosmic mechanism, and since it is from them that our
theogonies and our metaphysics are, and ever will be,
constructed; all our dear and fanciful "beyonds;" —
thirty-six situations, thirty-six emotions, and no more.
It is, then, comprehensible that in viewing upon the
stage the ceaseless mingling of these thirty-six emo
tions, a race or nation arrives at the beginning of its
definite self -consciousness ; the Greeks, indeed, began
their towns by laying the foundations of a theater. It
is equally natural that only the greatest and most com
plete civilizations should have evolved their own partic
ular conception of the drama, and that one of these
new conceptions should be revealed by each new evolu
tion of society, whence arises the dim but faithful ex
pectation of our own age, waiting for the manifestation
of its own dramatic ideals, before the cenotaphs of an
art which has long been, apparently for commercial
reasons, almost non-existent.
In fine, after having brought together all these dra
matic "points of view," we shall see, as in a panorama,
the great procession of our race, in characteristic
motley costumes: — Hindu kings in their chariots,
Chinese gallants playing their mandores, nude heroes
of Hellas, legendary knights, adventurers of sword and
cape, golden-tressed princesses, nymphs sparkling with
famed
gems, shy maids with drooping eyelashes,
courtesans, chaste Athenian virgins, priestly confes
sors, chattering gossips, gurus expounding religious
ideas, satyrs leaping upon goats' feet, ugly slaves,

peris, horned devils in disguise, lisping Tartaglias, gar
rulous Graciosos, Shakespearian clowns,
Hugoesque

INTRODUCTION

13

magistrates, immobile Buddhist ascetics,
white-robed sacrificers, martyrs with shining aureoles,
too-crafty Ulysses, frightful Rakchasas, messengers
dispersing calamitous tidings to the winds of heaven,
pure-hearted youths, blood-stained madmen, — yes,
here it assembles, our humanity, here it moves through
its periods of greatest intensity — but presenting always
one of the facets of the prism possessed by Gozzi.
These thirty-six facets, which I have undertaken to
recover, should obviously be simple and clear, and of
no far-fetched character ; of this we shall be convinced
after seeing them repeated, with unfailing distinctness,
in all epochs and in all genres.
The reader will find, in
my brief exposition, but twelve hundred examples cited,
of which about a thousand are taken from the stage ;
but in this number I have included works the most
dissimilar and the most celebrated, nearly all others
being but mosaics of these. There will here be found
the principal dramas of China, of India, of Judea, and,
However, in
needless to say, of the Greek theater.
stead of confining ourselves to the thirty-two classic
tragedies we shall make use of those works of Hellen
ism which, unfortunately for the indolent public of
today, still lie buried in Latin ; works from whose great
lines might be reconstructed hundreds of masterpieces,
and all offering us, from the shades to which we have
relegated them, the freshness of unfamiliar beauty.
Leaving aside, for the present, any detailed considera
tion of the Persian and mediaeval Mysteries, which
depend almost without exception upon two or three
situations, and which await a special study, we shall
glance over, — after the Jeux and Miracles of the
centuries, — the Spanish
thirteenth and fourteenth
authors, the French classics, the Italians, the Germans
of the Romantic revival, and our modern dramatic
literature. And it seems to me we shall have finally
proved this theory of the Thirty-six Situations, when
buffoons,

14

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

we shall thus have brought

it into contact with the

dramatic production of the last thirty years.
Two hundred of the examples cited have been taken
from other literary genres akin to the dramatic:
For this
romance, epic, history, — and from reality.
investigation can and should be pursued in human
nature, by which I mean in politics, in courts of
justice, in daily life.
Amid these explorations
tne present study will soon seem but an introduc
stream,
tion to a marvellous, an inexhaustible
—the Stream of Existence, where meet momen
tarily, in their primordial unity, history, mystic poetry,
moralist (and amoralist) writings, humor, psychology,
law, epic, romance, fable, myth, proverb and prophecy.
It may here be allowable to ask. with our theory in
mind, a number of questions which to us are of primary
importance.
Which are the dramatic situations neglected by our
own epoch, so faithful in repeating the few most
familiar? Which, on the other hand, are most in use
today? Which are the most neglected, and which the
most used, in each epoch, genre, school, author?
What are the reasons for these preferences? The
same questions may be asked before the classes and
sub-classes of the situations.
Such an examination, which requires only patience,
will show first the list of combinations (situations and
their classes and sub-classes) at present ignored, and
which remain to be exploited in contemporaneous art,
second, how these may be adapted.
On the way it may
chance that we shall discern, hidden within this or
that one of our thirty-six categories, a unique case,
— one without analogue among the other thirty-five,
with no immediate relationship to any other, the
product of a vigorous inspiration.
But, in carefully
determining the exact position of this case among the
sub-classes of the situation to which it belongs, we

INTRODUCTION

15

shall be able to form, in each of the thirty-five others,
a sub-class corresponding to it; thus will be created
thirty-five absolutely new plots. These will give, when
developed according to the taste of this or that school
or period, a series of thirty-five "original imitations,"
thirty-five new scenarios, of a more unforeseen char
acter, certainly, than the majority of our dramas,
which, whether inspired by books or realities, when
viewed in the clear light of the ancient writings re
vealed to us only their reflections, so long as we had
not, for our guidance, the precious thread which van
ished with Gozzi.
Since we now hold this thread, let us unwind it.

FIRST SITUATION
SUPPLICATION
(The dynamic elements technically necessary are: —
a Persecutor, a Suppliant and a Power in authority,
whose decision is doubtful).
Among" the examples here offered will be found
In the first,
those of three slightly differing classes.
the power whose decision is awaited is a distinct
personage, who is deliberating; shall he yield, from
motives of prudence or from apprehension for those
he loves, to the menaces of the persecutor, or rather,
from generosity, to the appeal of the persecuted? In
the second, by means of a contraction analogous to
that which abbreviates a syllogism* to an enthymeme,*
this undecided power is but an attribute of the persecu
tor himself, — a weapon suspended in his hand; shall

In the third
anger or pity determine his course?
group, on the contrary, the suppliant element is divided
between two persons, the Persecuted and the Interces
sor, thus increasing the number of principal char
acters to four.
These three groups (A, B, C) may be subdivided as
follows :
A (1) — Fugitives Imploring the Powerful for Help
♦Syllogism: A reckoning all together, a reasoning; to bring
at once before the mind; to infer; conclude.
As "Every virtue
is laudable; kindness is a virtue; therefore kindness is laudable."
Enthymeme: An argument consisting of only two propositions;

an antecedent and its consequent; a syllogism with one premise
omitted; as "We are dependent, therefore we should be humble."

FIRST SITUATION

17

Against Their Enemies. — Complete examples: "The
Suppliants" and "The Heraclidae" of Aeschylus; "The
Heraclidae" of Euripides; the "Minos" of Sophocles.
Cases in which the fugitives are guilty: the "Oi'cles"
and "Chryses" of Sophocles; "The Eumenides" of
Aeschylus.
A partial example : Act II of Shake
"King John." Familiar instances : scenes
speare's
from colonial protectorates.
(2) — Assistance Implored for the Performance of a
Pious Duty Which Has Been Forbidden. — Complete
examples: "The Eleusinians" of Aeschylus and "The
A historical example: the
Suppliants" of Euripides.
A
instance:
familiar
a family
burial of Moliere.
divided in its religious belief, wherein a child, in order
to worship according to his conscience, appeals to the
parent who is his co-religionist.
(3) — Appeals for a Refuge in Which to Die. — Com
at Colonus." Partial ex
plete example: "QEdipus
ample: the death of Zineb, in Hugo's "Mangeront-ils ?"
B (1) — Hospitality Besought by the Shipwrecked. —
Complete example: "Nausicaa" and "The Pheacians"
of Sophocles. Partial example: Act I of Berlioz'

"Trojans."
(2)— Charity Entreated by Those Cast off by Their

Own People, Whom They Have Disgraced. — Examples :
the "Danae" of Aeschylus and the "Danae" of
Euripides; the "Alope," "Auge" and "The Cretans" of
Euripides.
Familiar instances-: a large part of the
twenty
or
thousand adventures which, each
fifteen
year, come to an end in the Bureau des EnfantsAssistes. Special instance of a child received into a
home: the beginning of "Le Reve," by Zola.
(3) — Expiation: The Seeking of Pardon, Healing or
"Philoctetes ;"
Sophocles'
Deliverance. — Examples :
Aeschylus' "Mysians;" Euripides' "Telephus;" "Les
Ghampairol" (Rraisse, 1884). Historical example : the

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

18

Familiar instances : petitions
penitence of Barbarossa.
for pardon, confession of Catholics, etc.
(4) — The Surrender of a Corpse, or of a Relic, So

y

licited: — "The Phrygians" of Aeschylus.
Historical
examples: the Crusaders' embassies to the Moslems.
Familiar instances: the reclaiming of the remains of
a great man buried in a foreign land; of the body of
an executed person, or of a relative dead in a hospital.
It should be noted that the "Phrygians," and the
Twenty-fourth Book of the Iliad, which inspired the
play, form a transition toward the Twelfth Situation
(A Refusal Overcome).
C (1) — Supplication of the Powerful for Those Dear
to the Suppliant. — Complete example : Esther. Partial
example: Margaret in the denouement of "Faust."
Historical example: Franklin at the court of Louis
XVI. Example corresponding also to A (3) : the
"Propompes" of Aeschylus.
(2) — Supplication To a Relative in Behalf of Another
Relative. — Example: the "Eurysaces" of Sophocles.
(3) — Supplication to a Mother's Lover, in Her Be
half .—Example : "L'Enfant de i' Amour," (Bataille,
1911).

It is

apparent that, in the modern theater, very little
use has been made of this First Situation.
If we ex
cept subdivisions C (1), which is akin to the poetic
cult of the Virgin and the Saints, and C (3), there is
not a single pure example, doubtless for the reason that
the antique models have disappeared or have become
unfamiliar, and more particularly because, Shake
speare, Lope and Corneille not having transformed this
theme or elaborated it with those external complexi
ties demanded by our modern taste, their successors
have found the First Situation too bare and simple a
subject for this epoch. As if one idea were necessarily
more simple than another! — as if all those which have
since launched upon our stage their countless ramifica

FIRST SITUATION

19

tions had not in the beginning shown the same vigor
ous simplicity!
It is, however, our modern predilection for the com
plex which, to my mind, explains the favor now
accorded to group C alone, wherein by easy means a
fourth figure (in essence, unfortunately, a somewhat
one), the Intercessor, is
parasitic and monotonous
added to the trinity of Persecutor, Suppliant and
Power.
Of what variety, nevertheless, is this trinity capable !
The Persecutor, — one or many, voluntary or unconsci
ous, greedy or revengeful, spreading the subtle net
work of diplomacy, or revealing himself beneath the
formidable pomp of the greatest contemporary powers ;
the Suppliant, artless or eloquent, virtuous or guilty,
humble or great; and the Power, neutral or partial to
one side or the other, perhaps inferior in strength to
the Persecutor and surrounded by his own kindred who
fear danger, perhaps deceived by a semblance of right
and justice, perhaps obliged to sacrifice a high ideal;
emotionally
severely logical, sometimes
sometimes
susceptible, or even overcome by a conversion a la
Dostoievsky, and, as a final thunderbolt, abandoning the
errors which he believed to be truth, if not indeed the
truth which he believed to be error!
Nowhere, certainly, can the vicissitudes of power, be
it arbitral, tyrannical, or overthrown, — the supersti
tions which may accompany doubt and indecision, — in
the one side the sudden turns of popular opinion, on
the other the anxiety with which they are awaited, —
despairs and their resulting blasphemies, — hope sur
viving to the last breath, — the blind brutality of fate,—
nowhere can they become so condensed and burst forth
with such power as in this First Situation, in our day
ignored.
France's enthusiastic sympathy for Poland, re
vived during the last half-century ; the same sympathy

20

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

which on so many historic occasions she has mani
fested for Scotland and for Ireland, might here find
tragic expression; that cry of humanity with which
a single priest, at the massacre of Fourmies, rallied to
the Church a fraction of revolutionary
France ; the
worship of the dead, that first, last, most primitive
and most indestructible form of religious sentiment;
the agony which awaits us all, agony dragging itself
toward the darkness like a spent beast ; the profoundly
humble longing of one whom a murder has deprived
of all that was dearest to him, that pitiable entreaty,
on bended knees, which melted into tears the savage
rancor of Achilles and caused him to forget his vow; —
all are here in this First Situation, all these strong
emotions, and yet others ; nowhere else, indeed, can
they be found in such completeness, — and our modern
world of art has forgotten this situation !

SECOND SITUATION
DELIVERANCE
(Elements: an Unfortunate, a Threatener, a Rescuer)
the converse of the First Situation,
in which the unfortunate appeals to an undecided
power, whereas here an unexpected protector, of his
own accord, comes suddenly to the rescue of the dis
tressed and despairing.
A— Appearance of a Rescuer to the Condemned: —
The "Andromedas" of Sophocles, of Euripides and of
Corneille; "Le Jeu de Saint Nicolas" (Jean Bodel).
Partial examples: the first act of "Lohengrin;" the
third act of Voltaire's "Tancred;" the role of the
generous patron in "Boislaurier" (Richard, 1884). The
last example and the following show particularly the
honor of the unfortunate at stake : Daniel and Susanna,
and various exploits of chivalry.
A parody : "Don
Quixote." A familiar instance: judicial assistance.
The denouement of "Bluebeard" (here the element of
'
kinship enters, in the defense by brothers of their
sister, and increases the pathos by the most simple of
means, forgotten, however, by our playwrights).
B (1) — A Parent Replaced Upon a Throne by his
Children: — "Aegeus" and "Peleus," by Sophocles;
Euripides' "Antiope." Cases in which the children have
previously been abandoned are "Athamas I" and also
the "Tyro" of Sophocles.
(The taste of the future
author of "CEdipus at Colonus" for stories in which

This is, in

a way,

21

22

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

the Child plays the role of deliverer and dispenser of
justice, forms a bitter enough contrast to the fate
which awaited the poet himself in his old age.)
(2) — Rescue by Friends, or by Strangers Grateful
"GEneus,"
for Benefits or Hospitality: —Sophocles'
"Iolas" and "Phineus." A partial example: the
Example in
second part of Euripides'
"Alceste."
in which
comedy: Musset's "Fantasio." Example
protection is accorded by the host who has granted
asylum: Euripides' "Dictys."
We see, by a glance over these subdivisions, what our
writers might have drawn from the second of the Situ
ations. For us, indeed, it should possess some little
attraction, if only for the reason that two thousand
years ago humanity once more listened to this story
of the Deliverer, and since then has so suffered, loved
and wept for the sake of it. This situation is also the
basis of Chivalry, that original and individual heroism
of the Middle Ages; and, in a national sense, of the
Despite all this, in art, — if we
French Revolution.
except the burlesque of Cervantes, and the transplend
from
ent light flashing
the silver
armor
of
Lohengrin, — in art, as yet, it is hardly dreamed of.

THIRD SITUATION
CRIME PURSUED BY VENGEANCE
(Elements: an Avenger and a Criminal)
Vengeance is a joy divine, says the Arab; and such
indeed it seems to have frequently been, to the God
of Israel. The two Homeric poems both end with an
intoxicating vengeance, as does the characteristic
Oriental legend of the Pandavas ; while to the Latin and
Spanish races the most satisfying of spectacles is still
that of an individual capable of executing a legitimate,
although illegal, justice. So much goes to prove that
even twenty centuries of Christianity, following five
centuries of Socratic philosophy, have not sufficed to re
move Vengeance from its pedestal of honor, and to sub
stitute thereon Pardon. And Pardon itself,
even
though sincere, — what is it but the subtile quintessence
of vengeance upon earth, and at the same time the

claiming of a sort of wergild from Heaven?
A (1) — The Avenging of a Slain Parent or Ances
tor: — "The Singer," an anonymous Chinese drama;
"The Tunic Confronted" (of the courtesan Tchangkoue-pin) ; "The Argives" and "The Epigones" of
Aeschylus; Sophocles' "Aletes and Erigone;" "The
Two Foscari," by Byron ; Werner's "Attila ;" "Le Crime
de Maison-Alfort" (Coedes, 1881) ; "Le Maquignon"
(Josz and Dumur, 1903). In the last three cases, as
well as in the following one, the vengeance is accom
plished not by a son, but by a daughter. Example
23

24

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Familiar in
fiction: Merimee's "Colomba."
(Buet,
majority
the
of
vendettas.
"Le
Pretre"
stances:
1881) presents especially the psychologic struggle be
Example of the aveng
tween pardon and vengeance.
ing of a father driven to suicide: "L'Or" (Peter and
Danceny, 1908) .
(2) — The Avenging of a Slain Child or Descendant:
— Sophocles' "Nauplius;" a part of "Sainte-Helene"
Euripides'
end of
Severine,
1902) ; the
(Mme.
Epic example: Neptune's pursuit of
"Hecuba."
Ulysses because of the blinding of Polyphemus.
(3) — Vengeance for a Child Dishonored: — "El Mejor
Alcalde el Rey," by Lope de Vega; "The Alcalde of
Zalamea," by Calderon.
Historic example: the death
of Lucrece.
(4) — The Avenging of a Slain Wife or Husband: —
Carneille's "Pompee;" "L'Idiot" (de Lorde, 1903).
Contemporary instance: the trials of Mme. Veuve
Barreme.
(5) — Vengeance for the Dishonor, or Attempted
Dishonoring, of a Wife: — The "Ixions" of Aeschylus,
of Sophocles and of Euripides; "The Perrhoebides" of
Aeschylus; "Les Revoltes" (Cain and Adenis, 1908).
Historic example: the priest of Ephraim.
Similar
cases, in which the wife has only been insulted:
"Venisamhara," by Bhatta Narayana; "The Sons of
Pandou,"
Rajasekhara.
by
Familiar instances:
a large number of duels.
(6) — Vengeance for a Mistress Slain: — "Love after
Death," by Caleron; "Amhra" (Grangeneuve, 1882);
"Simon the Foundling" (Jonathan, 1882.
(7) — Vengeance for a Slain or Injured Friend: —
"The Nereids" of Aeschylus. A contemporary instance :
Ravachol. Case in which the vengeance is perpetrated
upon the mistress of the avenger: "La Casserole"
(Metenier, 1889).
from

THIRD SITUATION

25

Sister Seduced: — Goethe's
1888);
"Clavijo;"
"La
(Icres,
"Les Bouchers"
Casquette au Pere Bugeaud" (Marot, 1886) . Examples
from fiction: "La KermeaseJiouge," in Eekhoud's collection, and the end of Bourget's "Disciple."
B (1) — Vengeance for Intentional Injury or Spolia
Contemporary in
tion: — Shakespeare's "Tempest."
stance : Bismarck in his retirement at Varzin.
(2) — Vengeance for Having Been Despoiled During
Absence: — "Les Joueurs d'Osselets" and "Penelope,"
by Aeschylus; "The Feast of the Achaeans," by
(8) — Vengeance

Sophocles.
(3) — Revenge

for

a

Attempted Slaying: — "The
Anger of Te-oun-go," by Kouan-han-king.
A similar
case involving at the same- time the saving of a loved
one by a judicial error: "La Cellule No. 7," (Zaccone,

for

an

1881).
for a False
(4) — Revenge
"Phrixus" of Sophocles and of
"Monte-Cristo;" "La Declassee"

Accusation: — The
Euripides; Dumas'
(Delahaye, 1883);

"Roger-la-Honte"

(Mary, 1881).
for
Violation : — S o p h o c i e s'
"Tereus;" "The Courtesan of Corinth" (Carre and
Bilhaud, 1908) ; "The Cenci," by Shelley (parricide as
the punishment of incest) .
(6) — Vengeance for Having Been Robbed of Ones
Own: — "The Merchant of Venice," and partly "William
(5) — Vengeance

Tell."

— Revenge Upon a Whole Sex for
—
One: "Jack the Ripper" (Bertrand

Deception by
and Clairian,
1889) ; the fatal heroines of the typical plays of the
Second Empire, "L'Etrangere," etc. A case appertain
ing also to class A : the motive (an improbable one) of
the corruptress in "Possede," by Lemonnier.
We here encounter for the first time that grimacing
personage who forms the keystone of all drama dark
About the beginning
and mysterious, — the "villain."
(7)

a

«

ly

26

,

«/

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

of our Third Situation we might evoke him at every
step, this villain and his profound schemes which not
infrequently make us smile. Don Salluste in "RuyBlas," Iago in "Othello," Guanhumara in "Burgraves,"
Homodei in "Angelo," Mahomet in the tragedy of that
name, Leontine in "Heraclius," Maxime in "La Tragedie
Valentinien,"
Emire in "Siroes," Ulysses in
de
"Palamedes."
C — Professional Pursuit of Criminals
(the counterpart of which will be found in the Fifth Situation,
Doyle);
Class A):— "Sherlock^, Holmes"
(Conan
"Vidocq" (Bergerat, 1910) ; "Nick Carter" (Busson
and Livet, 1910).
Frequently used though this situation has been in
our day, many an ancient case awaits its rejuvenes
Indeed, among
cence, many a gap is yet to be filled.
the bonds which may unite avenger and victim, more
than one degree of relationship has been omitted, as
The
well as the majority of social and business ties.
list of wrongs which might provoke reprisal is far from
being exhausted, as we may assure ourselves by enum
erating the kinds of offenses possible against persons
or property, the varying shades of opinion, of opposing
parties, the different ways in which an insult may take
effect, and how many and what sort of relationships
may exist between Avenger and Criminal.
And these
questions concern merely the premises of the action.
To this we may add all the turns and bearings, slow
or instantaneous, direct or tortuous, frantic or sure,
which punishment can take, the thousand resources
which it offers, the points at which it may aim in its
deadly course, the obstacles which chance or the
defendant may present.
Next introduce various
secondary figures, each pursuing his own aims, as in
life, intercrossing each other and crossing the drama—
and I have sufficient esteem for the reader's capabili
ties to develop the subject no further.

FOURTH SITUATION
VENGEANCE TAKEN FOR KINDRED UPON
KINDRED
(Elements:

Kinsman; Guilty Kinsman,
of the Victim, a Relative of Both.)

Avenging

Remembrance

Augmenting the horror of Situation XXVII ("Dis
covery of the Dishonor of Ones Kindred") by the
rough vigor of Situation III, we create the present
action, which confines itself to family life, making of
it a worse hell than the dungeon of Poe's "Pit and the
The horror of it is such that the terrified
Pendulum."
spectators dare not intervene ; they seem to be witness
ing at a distance some demoniac scene silhouetted in
a flaming house.
Neither, it seems, do our dramatists dare intervene
to modify the Greek tragedy, — such as it is after
thirty appalling centuries.
For us it is easy to compute, from the height of our
"platform" — to use Gozzi's word — the infinite varia
tions possible to this theme, by multiplying the com
binations which we have just found in the Third Situa
tion, by those which the Twenty-seventh will give us.
Other germs of fertility will be found in turn in the
circumstances which have determined the avenger's
action. These may be a spontaneous
desire on his
own part (the simplest motive) ; the wish of the dying
victim, or of the spirit of the dead mysteriously appear
27

28

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

ing to the living ; an imprudent promise ; a profession
al duty (as when the avenger is a magistrate, etc.) ;
the necessity of saving other relatives or a beloved one
(thus did Talien avenge the Dantonists) or even fellowcitizens ; ignorance of the kinship which exists between
Avenger and Criminal.
There yet remains that case
in which the Avenger strikes without having recog
nized the Criminal (in a dark room, I suppose) ; the
case in which the act of intended vengeance is but the
result of an error, the supposedly guilty kinsman being
found innocent, and his pseudo-executioner discovering
that he has but made of himself a detestable criminal.
A (1) — A Father's Death Avenged Upon a Mother:
—"The Choephores" of Aeschylus; the "Electras" of
Sophocles, Euripides, Attilius, Q. Cicero, Pradon, Longepierre, Crebillon, Rochefort, Chenier, and of Guillard's
opera; the "Orestes" of Voltaire and of Alfieri;
Sophocles' "Epigones;" the "Eriphyles" of Sophocles
and of Voltaire ; and lastly "Hamlet," in which we recog
nize so clearly the method by which the poet rejuven
ates his subjects, — by an almost antithetic change of
characters and of milieu.
(2) — A Mother Avenged Upon a Father: — "Zoe
Chien-Chien" (Matthey, 1881) in which the parricide
is counter-balanced by an incestuous passion, and is
committed by the daughter, not by the son.
B— A Brother's Death Avenged Upon a Son (but
without premeditation, this accordingly falling almost
into the situation "Imprudence") : — Aeschylus' "Atalanta" and Sophocles' "Meleager."
C — A Father's Death Avenged Upon a Husband: —
"Rosmunde" (Rucellai).
D — A Husband's Death Avenged Upon a Father: —
"Orbecche" by Giraldi.
Thus, of twenty-two works, eighteen are in the same
class, seventeen in the same sub-class, thirteen upon
the same subject; — four classes
and one sub-class

FOURTH SITUATION

29

altogether.
Let us, for the moment, amuse ourselves
by counting some of those which have been forgotten.
A father's death avenged upon the brother of the
Upon his sister. Upon his mistress (or, in
avenger.
the case of a feminine avenger, upon her lover, for
each of the cases enumerated has its double, according
Upon his wife. Upon his
to the sex of the avenger) .
Upon his paternal uncle.
son. Upon his daughter.
Upon his maternal uncle. Upon his paternal or mater
his paternal or maternal grand
nal grandfather;
Upon half-brother or half-sister.
Upon a
mother.
(brother-in-law,
sister-inperson allied by marriage
law, etc.) or a cousin.
These numerous variations may
of course be successively repeated for each case : — the
avenging of a brother, a sister, a husband, a son, a
grandfather, and so on.
By way of variety, the vengeance may be carried out,
not upon the person of the criminal himself, but upon
some one dear to him (thus Medea and Atreus struck
Jason and Thyestes through their children) , and even
inanimate objects may take the place of victims.

FIFTH SITUATION
PURSUIT
(Elements: Punishment and Fugitive)

As the Second Situation was the converse of the
First, so this situation of Pursuit represents a transi
tion into the passive of the Third and Fourth, and, in
fact, of all those in which danger pursues a character.
There remains, however, a distinction; in Pursuit the

avenging element holds second place, or perhaps not
even that; it may be, indeed, quite invisible and
abstract. Our interest is held by the fugitive alone;
sometimes innocent, always excusable, for the fault —
if there was one— appears to have been inevitable,
ordained; we do not inquire into it or blame it, which
would be idle, but sympathetically suffer the conse
quences with our hero, who, whatever he may once
have been, is now but a fellow-man in danger.
We
recall that truth which Goethe once flung in the face of
hypocrisy ; that, each one of us having within him the
potentiality for all the crimes, there is not one which
it is impossible to imagine ourselves committng, under
certain circumstances. In this Situation we feel our
selves, so to speak, accomplices in even the worst of
slayings. Which may be explained by the reflection
that along our various lines of heredity many such
crimes might be found, and our present virtuousness
may mean simply an immunity from criminal tend
encies which we have gained by the experience of our
80

FIFTH SITUATION

31

If this be the case, heredity and environ
ancestors.
ment, far from being oppressive fatalities, become the
germs of wisdom, which, satiety being reached, will

triumph. This is why genius (not that of neurosis,
but of the more uncommon mastery of neurosis) ap
pears especially in families which have transmitted to
it a wide experience of folly.
Through drama, then, we are enabled to gain our
experience of error and catastrophe in a less costly
way; by means of it we evoke vividly the innumer
able memories which are sleeping in our blood, that
we may purify ourselves of them by force of repetition,
and accustom our dark souls to their own reflections.
Like music, it will in the end "refine our manners" and
dower us with the power of self-control, basis of all
virtue. Nothing is more moral in effect than im
morality in literature.
The sense of isolation which characterizes Situation
V gives a singular unity to the action, and a clear
field for psychologic observation, which need not be
lessened by diversity of scenes and events.
A — Fugitives From Justice Pursued For Brigandage,
Political Offenses, Etc.: — "Louis Perez of Galicia" and
"Devotion to the Cross," both by Calderon ; the begin
ning of the mediaeval Miracle "Robert-le-Diable" ;
by Schiller; "Raffles"
(Hornung,
"The Brigands"
Historical examples: the proscription of the
1907).
Conventionnels ; the Duchesse de Berry. Examples
from fiction : "Rocambole" by Gaboriau ; "Arsene Lupin"
Familiar instances: police news. Ex
(Leblanc).
ample in comedy : "Compere le Renard" (Polti, 1905) .
B — Pursued For a Fault of Love: — unjustly,
"Indigne !" (Barbier, 1884) ; more justly, Moliere's
"Don Juan" and Corneille's "Festin de Pierre," (not to
speak of various works of Tirso de Molina, Tellez,
Villiers, Sadwell, Zamora, Goldoni, Grabbe, Zorilla,
Dumas pere) ; very justly, "Ajax of Locris," by

32

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Familiar instances run all the way from
Sophocles.
the forced marriage of seducers to arrests for side
walk flirtations.
C — A Hero Struggling Against a Power: — Aeschy
lus' "Prometheus Bound"; Sophocles' "Laocoon"; the
role of Porus in Racine's and also in Metastasio's
"Alexandre" ; Corneille's "Nicomede" ; Goethe's "Goetz
von Berlichingen" and a part of "Egmont" ; Metastasio's
"Cato" ; Manzoni's "Adelghis" and a part of his "Count
of Carmagnola" ; the death of Hector in Shakespeare's
"Troilus and Cressida" ; "Nana-Sahib" (Richepin, 1883) ;
"Edith" (Bois, 1885) ; the tetralogy of the "Nibeiungen' ; "An Enemy of the People" (Ibsen) ; "Le Roi
sans Couronne" (de Bouhelier, 1909).
D — A Pseudo-Madman Struggling Against an IagoLike Alienist: — "La Vicomtesse Alice" (Second, 1882).

SIXTH SITUATION
DISASTER
(Elements

:

a

Vanquished Power ; a Victorious Enemy
or a Messenger)

Fear, catastrophe, the unforeseen ; a great reversal of
roles; the powerful are overthrown, the weak exalted.
Here is the oft-recurring refrain of the Biblical books,
here the immortal echoes of the fall of Troy, at which
we still pale as though with a presentiment.
A (1)— Defeat Suffered :— "The Myrmidons" and
"The Persians" of Aeschylus ; "The Shepherds" of
Example from fiction; "La Debacle," by
Sophocles.
History is made up of repetitions of this story.
Zola.
—
A Fatherland Destroyed: — "The Xoanephores"
(2)
of Sophocles ; Byron's "Sardanapalus" (this corresponds
also to Class B, and toward the denouement recalls the
Fifth Situation). Examples from history: Poland;
the great Invasions.
From romance : "The War of the
Worlds" (Wells).
(3)—The Fall of Humanity :— the Mystery of
"Adam" (twelfth century).
(4) — A Natural Catastrope: — "Terre d'Epouvante"
(de Lorde and Morel, 1907).
B— A Monarch Overthrown (the converse of the
Eighth) :— Shakespeare's "Henry VI" and "Richard
II." Historic instances: Charles I, Louis XVI, Napo
leon, etc.; and, substituting other authorities than
kings, Colomb, de Lesseps, and all disgraced ministers.
Examples from fiction:
the end of "Tartarin,"
"L'Argent," "Cesar Birotteau."
8

33

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

34

(1)— Ingratitude Suffered (of all the blows of
misfortune, this is perhaps the most poignant) : —
C

Euripides' "Archelaus" (excepting the denouement, in
which the action is reversed) ; Shakespeare's "Timon
of Athens" and "King Lear," and the beginning of his
"Coriolanus" ; Byron's "Marino Faliero"; a part of
"The Count of Carmagnola," by Manzoni. Bismarck's
The
dismissal by the young Emperor William.
martyrs, the many instances of devotion and sacrifice
unappreciated by those who have benefited by it, the
most glorious of deaths shine against this dark back
ground; Socrates and the Passion are but the most
"Le Reformateur" (Rod, 1906).
celebrated examples.
—
of Unjust Punishment or
The Suffering
(2)
Enmity (this corresponds in some degree to the
"Judicial Errors") : — Sophocles' "Teucer" ; Aeschylus'
"Salaminiae."
(3)— An Outrage Suffered :— the first act of "The
Cid" ; the first act of "Lucrece Borgia." The "point of
honor" offers better material than these simple
We may imagine some more sensitive
episodes.
Voltaire, reduced by his persecutions to helplessness
and to the point of dying in despair.
D (1) — Abandonment by a Lover or a Husband: —
"Faust"; Corneille's "Ariane"; the beginning of the
"Medeas"; "Maternite" (Brieux, 1903). .
(2)— Children Lost by Their Parents:— "Le Petit
Poucet."
If classes B, C and D, which are concerned with the
fate of individuals, have been so much less developed
than they might easily have been, what shall be said
of the case of social disasters, such as Class A?
did not tread far enough upon that
Shakespeare
majestic way. Only among the Greeks has a work of
this kind presented at one stroke that conception of
human events, sublime, fatalistic and poetic, of which
Herodotus was one day to create history.

■N

SEVENTH SITUATION
FALLING PREY

TO

CRUELTY OR MISFORTUNE

(Elements: an Unfortunate; a Master or a

Misfortune)
To infinite sorrow there is no limit. Beneath that
which seems the final depth of misfortune, there may
A ferocious and
open another yet more frightful.
deliberate dissection of the heart it seems, this Seventh
Situation, — that of pessimism par excellence.
A — The Innocent Made the Victim of Ambitious
Intrigue: — "The Princess Maleine"
(Maeterlinck) ;
"The Natural Daughter," by Goethe; "Les Deux
Jumeaux," by Hugo.
B — The Innocent Despoiled by Those Who Should
Protect: — "The Guests" and the beginning of the
"Joueurs d'Osselets," by Aeschylus (at the first vibra
tion of the great bow in the hands of the unknown
Beggar, what a breath of hope we draw!) ; "Les Corbeaux" by Becque ; "Le Roi de Rome" (Pouvillon) ;
"L'Aiglon" (Rostand) ; "La Croisade des Enfantelets

Francs" (Ernault).
C
(1) — The Powerful Dispossessed and Wretched:

—The beginning

of Sophocles' and of Euripides'
"Peleus" ; of "Prometheus Bound" ; of "Job." Laertes
in his garden.
Example from comedy: "Le Jeu de la
Feuillee" (Adam de la Halle).
(2) — A Favorite or an Intimate Finds Himself For
gotten:— "En Detresse" (Fevre, 1890).
35

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

86

D—The Unfortunate

Robbed of Their Only Hope:—

"The Blind" by Maeterlinck;

"Beethoven"

(Fauchois,

"Rembrandt" (Dumur and Josz).
And now many cases yet remain! The Jews in
captivity, slavery in America, the horrors of the
Hundred Years' War, invaded ghettos, scenes such as
draw the crowd to any reproduction of prison life or of
Inquisition, the attraction of Dante's Inferno, of Pellico's "Prisons," the transporting bitterness of Gau
tama, of Ecclesiastes, of Schopenhauer!
1909)

;

EIGHTH SITUATION
REVOLT
(Elements: Tyrant and Conspirator)

As already observed, this situation is, in a measure,
the converse of Class B of Situation VI.
Intrigue, so dear to the public of the past three cen
turies, is obviously supplied by the very nature of the
subject we are now to consider.
But, by some strange
chance, it has, on the contrary, always been treated
with the most open candor and simplicity. One or two
vicissitudes, a few surprises all too easily foreseen and
extending uniformly to all the personages of the play,
and there we have the conditions which have almost
invariably been attached to this action, so propitious,
nevertheless, to doubts, to equivocation, to a twilight
whose vague incertitude prepares the dawn of revolt
and of liberty.
A (1) — A Conspiracy Chiefly of One Individual: —
"The Conspiracy of Fiesco," by Schiller; Corneille's
"Cinna"; to some extent the "Catilina" of Voltaire
(this tragedy belongs rather to the Thirtieth Situa
tion, "Ambition"); "Thermidor"; "The Conspiracy of
General Malet" (Auge de Lassus, 1889) ; "Le Grand
Soir" (Kampf ) ; "Le Roi sans Royaume" (Decourcelle,
1909): "Lorenzaccio" (Musset).
(2) — A Conspiracy of Several: — "The Conspiracy of
the Pazzi" by Alfieri ; "Le Roman d'une Conspiration"
(by Fournier and Carre, after the story of Ranc) ;
37

38

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

"Madame Margot" (Moreau and Clairville, 1909) ; and,
in comedy, "Chantecler" (Rostand, 1910) with its
parody "Rosse, tant et plus" (Mustiere, 1910).
B (1) — Revolt of One Individual, Who Influences
and Involves Others: — Goethe's "Egmont"; "Jacques
Bonhomme" (Maujan, 1886) ; "La Mission de Jeanne
d'Arc" (Dalliere, 1888). Example from fiction: "Salammbo." From history: Solon feigning madness.
(2) — A Revolt of Many: — "Fontovejune," by Lope
de Vega; Schiller's "William Tell"; Zola's "Germinal";
"The Weavers of Silesia," by Hauptmann (forbidden in
1893 with the approval of a Parliament soon afterward
dissolved) ; "L'Automne," by Paul Adam and Gabriel
Mourey (forbidden in 1893 with the approval of another
Parliament shortly before its dissolution) ; "L'Armee
dans la Ville" (Jules Romain, 1911) : "The Fourteenth
of July" (Roland, 1902).
From fiction: a part of the
"Fortunes des Rougon" by Zola. From history; the
taking of the Bastile, and numerous disturbances of the
same period.
This species of action, particularly in modern scenes,
has given fine virile dramas to England, Spain, Italy
and Germany; of a forceful and authoritative char

acter in the two first countries, of a youthful enthusi
astic type in the two last. France, most certainly,
would seem of all countries the most likely to under

stand and express such emotions.
But. . . "Thermidor" was prohibited "for fear"
it might offend the friends (centenarians apparently)
of Maximilian; "Le Pater" "for fear" it might be dis
pleasing to Communists;
Zola's
"Germinal"
and
"L'Automne" by Adam and Mourey
(two works
Dainted in widely different colors, as the titles sufficient
ly indicate) were stopped "for fear" of the objections
of a few conservatives; "Other People's Money" by

Hennique, "for fear" of shocking certain financiers
who have since been put behind bars; "Lohengrin" (al

EIGHTH SITUATION

39

thougn the subject is Celtic) was long forbidden "for
of irritating a half-dozen illiterate French
chauvinists; an infinite number of other plays "for
fear" ot annoying Germany (or our parlor diplomats
who talk of it) . . . . Yet others "for fear" of vexing
the Grand Turk!
Is it possible, notwithstanding all this, to find a
single instance in which a dramatic production has
brought about a national calamity such as our censors
fear? The pretext is no more sincere than are those
urged for excluding from the theater any frank and
truthful representations of love. A rule against
admitting children should be sufficient to satisfy
modesty on this point; even that is little needed, since
children unaccompanied by their elders rarely apply for
admission.
Our sentimental bourgeoisie apparently holds to the
eighteenth-century opinion that it is more dangerous
to listen to these things in public than to read of them
in private. For our dramatic art— which, be it noted,
has remained, despite its decline, the one great un
thought
rivalled means
of propagating
French
—
throughout Europe has been forbidden, little by little,
to touch directly upon theology, politics, sociology,
upon criminals or crimes, excepting (and pray why
this exception?) adultery, upon which subject our
theater, to its great misfortune, now lives, at least two
days out of three.
The ancients had a saying that a man enslaved loses
half his soul. A dramatist is a man.

fear"

NINTH SITUATION
DARING ENTERPRISE
(A Bold Leader;

an Object; an Adversary)

The Conflict, which forms the framework of all
dramatic situations, is, in the Ninth, clearly drawn,
undisguised. A clever plan, a bold attempt, sang
froid, — and victory!
A— Preparations For War: — (In this class, as
anciently treated, the action stops before the denoue
ment, which it leaves to be imagined, in the perspective
Examples: — Aeschylus'
of enthusiastic prediction).
"Nemea"; "The Council of the Argives" by Sophocles.
Historic examples: the call to the Crusades; the
Volunteers of '92.
B (1)—War:— Shakespeare's "Henry V."
Pontius," Memnon,"
(2) — A Combat: — "Glaucus
"Phineus" and "The Phorcides" of Aeschylus.
C (1) — Carrying Off a Desired Person or Object:
—the "Prometheus" of Aeschylus; the "Laconian
Women," by Sophocles.
From fiction: the taking of
Epic example : the second
the Zaimph in "Salammbo."
Homeric hymn (to Hermes) .
(2) — Recapture of a Desired Object: — "The Victory
of Arjuna," by Cantchana Atcharya ; Wagner's "Parsi
fal" ; the re-taking of the Zaimph
D (1) — Adventurous Expeditions: — Lope's "Dis
covery of the New World"; Aeschylus' "Prometheus
Unbound"; Euripides' "Theseus"; Sophocles' "Sinon";
40

NINTH SITUATION

41

Examples from
the "Rhesus" attributed to Euripides.
romance : the usual exploits of the heroes of fairy tales ;
the Labors of Hercules; the majority of Jules Verne's
stories.
(2) — Adventure Undertaken for the Purpose of
Obtaining a Beloved Woman: — Sophocles' and Euri
pides' "CEnomaus." From fiction : "Toilers of the Sea."
For the purpose of saving the honor of a lover: "La
Petite Caporale" (Darlay and de Gorsse, 1909).
The Ninth Situation thus summarizes the poetry of
war, of robbery, of surprise, of desperate chance, — the
poetry of the clear-eyed adventurer, of man beyond the
restraints of artificial civilizations, of Man in the
original acceptation of the term. We find, neverthe
less, hardly a single French work in this class !
Lest the reader be wearied, I refrain from enumerat
ing, under these classes so lightly touched upon, many
of the plots and complications which might be evolved
from them. Methods of tracking the human game —
bandit or hero, — the forces conspiring for his disaster,
the conditions which make him the victim of his
masters, the ways in which revolt may arise, the al
ternatives of the struggle in a "daring enterprise,"
certainly would appear to be more complex today than
in earlier ages ; moreover, upon these themes parts
borrowed from other situations may be engrafted with
remarkable ease. Even if we desire to preserve to the
said themes their archaic severity, how much may yet
In how many ways, to cite but
be drawn from them !
Expedition
be
one example, might an Adventurous
changed by varying the motives or the object of the
enterprise, the nature of the obstacles, the qualities
of the hero, and the previous bearings of the three
indispensable elements of the drama! "Adventurous
Travels" have hardly been touched upon. And how
many other classes are there which have not been !

TENTH SITUATION
ABDUCTION
(The Abductor; the Abducted; the Guardian)
Or, the Great Bourgeois Romance ! Was it not thus
that Moliere used to put an end to his comedies, when
he judged that the moment had arrived for sending
Sometimes he substi
his audience home satisfied?
tuted a treasure-box for a girl, as in "Tartuffe," or
arranged an exchange of the one for the other, as in

"L'Avare."

We find in ABDUCTION one of the situations bear
ing upon Rivalry, and in which Jealousy appears,
although not painted with so superb a coloring as in the
Twenty-fourth.
In two of the following classes (B and C) we may
remark the intrusion of the situations "Adultery" and
"Recovery of a Lost Loved One." The same usage is
quite possible in almost all the other situations. I
would point out to those who may be interested in a
more detailed analysis, that love is not necessarily the
motive of Abduction (in Class D will be found friend
ship, faith, etc.) nor the reason of the obstacles raised
by the guardian.
A— Abduction of an Unwilling Woman: — Aeschylus'
and Sophocles' "Orithyies"; Aeschylus' "Europa" and
"The Carians." "With Fire and Sword" (after Sienkiewicz, 1904).
Comedy: "Le Jeu de Robin et de
Marion" (Adam de la Halle). Historic and legendary:
42

TENTH SITUATION

43

the Sabine women; Cassandra. There appears to me
to be tragic material in cases of extreme eroticism, of
premeditated violation preceded by a mania of passion
and its resulting state of overexcitation, and followed
by the murder of the outraged victim, by regret»
repugnant
corpse,
before the beautiful
by
the
work of dismemberment or concealment of the body;
then by a disgust for life and by successive blunders
which lead to the discovery of the criminal.
B — Abduction of a Consenting Woman: — "The
Abduction of Helen" by Sophocles, and the comedy of
the same name but not upon the same subject, by Lope.
Numberless other comedies and romances.
C
(1) — Recapture of the Woman Without the
Slaying of the Abductor: — Euripides' "Helen"; "Malati
and Madhava," by Bhavabhuti
(the poet "of voice
"Iphigenia
Rescue
of
a
sister:
in Tauris."
divine").
Case,
Slaying
The
Same
With
the
of the
(2)—
—
"Mahaviracharita," by Bhavabhuti; "HanRavisher:
ouman" (a collaborative work) ; "Anarghara-ghava"
(anonymous) ; "The Message of Angada," by Soubhata ;
"Abhirama Mani," by Soundara Misra ; "Hermione" by
Sophocles.

D (1) — Rescue of a Captive Friend: — "Richard
Coeur-de-Lion," by Sedaine and Gretry.
A great
number of escapes, historic and fictitious.
(2)— Ot a Child:— "L'Homme de Proie" (Lefevre
and Laporte, 1908).
(3) — Of a Soul in Captivity to Error: — "Barlaam
and Josaphat," a fourteenth-century Miracle.
The
deeds of the Apostles, of missionaries, etc.

ELEVENTH SITUATION
THE ENIGMA
(Interrogator, Seeker and Problem)

This situation

interest par
possesses theatrical
excellence, since the spectator, his curiosity aroused
by the problem, easily becomes so absorbed as to fancy
it is himself who is actually solving it. A combat of
the intelligence with opposing wills, the Eleventh Situa

tion may be fitly symbolized by an interrogation point.
A— Search for a Person Who Must be Found on Pain
"Polyidus."
of Death: — Sophocles'
and Euripides'
Case without this danger, in which an object, not a
person, is sought: Poe's "Purloined Letter."
B (1)— A Riddle to be Solved on Pain of Death:—
"The Sphinx" of Aeschylus. Example from fiction
(without the danger) : "The Gold Bug" by Poe.
(2)— The Same Case, in Which the Riddle is Pro
posed by the Coveted Woman: — Partial example: the
beginning of Shakespeare's "Pericles."
Example from
fiction : "The Travelling Companion," by Andersen. Epic
example (but without the danger) : the Queen of Sheba
and Solomon.
Partial example: Portia's coffers, in
"The Merchant of Venice."
The sort of contest, preliminary to the possession of
a desired one, which is vaguely sketched in this episode,
is singularly alluring in its suggestive analogues. But
how many fibres, ready to thrill, will the perplexities
of the love contest find in us, when they are raised to
44

ELEVENTH SITUATION

it

their third power by the introduction of the terrible,
which we
as in the one complete and pure example
—
the "Turandot" of the incomparable Gozzi; a
have,
work passionately admired, translated, produced and
rendered famous in Germany by Schiller ; a work which
has for a century been regarded as a classic by all the
world, although it remains little known in France.
The effect of B (2) is strengthened and augmented
in cases in which the hero is subjected to the following:
C (1)— Temptations Offered With the Object of
Discovering His Name.
(2) — Temptations Offered With the Object of Ascer
taining the Sex: — "The Scyrian Women" of Sophocles
and of Euripides.
(3) — Tests For the Purpose of Ascertaining the
Mental Condition: — "Ulysses Furens" of Sophocles;
"The Palamedes" of Aeschylus and of Euripides (ac
cording to the themes attributed to these lost works) .
Examinations of criminals by alienists.

TWELFTH SITUATION
OBTAINING
Who Is Refusing, or
an Arbitrator and Opposing Parties.)

(A Solicitor

and an Adversary

An
Diplomacy and eloquence here come into play.
What
end is to be attained, an object to be gained.
interests may not be put at stake, what weighty
arguments or influences removed, what intermediaries
or disguises may be used to transform anger into
benevolence, rancor into renouncement; to put the
Despoiler in the place of the Despoiled ? What mines
may be sprung, what counter-mines discovered ! — what
unexpected revolts of submissive instruments!
This
dialectic contest which arises between reason and
passion, sometimes subtile and persuasive, sometimes
forceful and violent, provides a fine situation, as natural
as it is original.
A— Efforts to Obtain an Object by Ruse or Force: —
the "Philoctetes" of Aeschylus, of Sophocles
and of
Euripides ; the reclamation of the Thebans in "OHdipus
at Colonus"; "The Minister's Ring," by Vishakadatta.
B— Endeavor by Means of Persuasive Eloquence
Alone : — "The Desert Isle," by Metastasio ; the father's
attitude in "Le Fils Naturel" (Dumas), to which Ruse
is soon afterward added; Scene 2 of Act V of Shake
speare's "Coriolanus."
C — Eloquence With an Arbitrator: — "The Judgment
of Arms," by Aeschylus; "Helen Reclaimed," by
Sophocles.
46

TWELFTH SITUATION

47

in the theater, notwith
standing its frequency, is Temptation, already intro
The
situation.
duced as a part of the preceding
irritated adversary is here the Defiant; the solicitor,
now the Tempter, has undertaken an unusual negotia
tion, one for the obtaining of an object which nothing
can persuade the owner to part with ; consequently the
aim must be, gently, little by little, to bewilder, charm
or stupefy him. Eternal role of woman toward man !
— and of how many things toward the project of
being a man! Does it not call to mind the hieratic
attitude of the Christian toward Satan, as Flaubert
has illuminated it, with a thousand sparkling lights, in
his "Temptation of Saint Anthony?"
One of the cases unused

THIRTEENTH SITUATION
ENMITY OF KINSMEN
(Elements: a Malevolent Kinsman; a Hated or
Reciproeally Hating Kinsman)

Antithesis,* which constituted for Hugo the gener
ative principle of art, — dramatic art in particular, —
and which naturally results from the idea of Conflict
which is the basis of drama, offers one of the most
symmetrical of schemes in these contrasting emotions .
"Hatred of one who should be loved," of which the
worthy pendant is the Twenty-Ninth, "Love of one
who should be hated." Such confluents necessarily
give rise to stormy action.
It is easy to foresee the following laws :
First: The more closely are drawn the bonds which
unite kinsmen at enmity, the more savage and danger
ous their outbursts of hate are rendered.
Second: When the hatred is mutual, it will better
characterize our Situation than when it exists upon
one side only, in which case one of the relatives be
comes Tyrant and the other Victim, the ensemble
resulting in Situations V, VII, VIII, XXX, etc.
Third: The great difficulty will be to find and to
♦Antithesis: An opposition or contrast of words or ideas
especially one emphasized by the positions of contrasting words,
as when placed at the beginning or end of a single sentence or
clause, or, in corresponding positions in two or more sentences
(Measures, not men. The prodigal robs his heir;
or clauses.
Here the reference, of course, is to
the miser robs himself.)
ideas.

THIRTEENTH SITUATTON

49

represent convincingly an element of discord powerful
enough to cause the breaking of the strongest human
ties.
A — Hatred of Brothers: (1) — One Brother Hated by
Several (the hatred not malignant) : "The Heliades" of
Aeschylus (motive, envy) ; "The Labors of Jacob," by
Hated by a
Lope de Vega (motive, filial jealousy).
single brother: The "Phoenissae" of Euripides and of
Seneca ; "Polynices" by Alfieri (motive, tyrannical ava
rice) ; Byron's "Cain" (motive, religious jealousy) ;
"Une Famille au Temps de Luther" by Delavigne
(motive, religious dissent) ; "Le Duel"
(Lavedan,
1905).

Hatred: — The "Seven Against
(2) — Reciprocal
Thebes," by Aeschylus, and "Les Freres Ennemis"
by Racine (motive, greed for power) ; an admirable
supplementary character is added in this Theban
legend, the Mother, torn between the sons; "Thyestes
II" of Sophocles; "Thyestes" of Seneca; the "Pelopides"
by Voltaire; "Atreus and Thyestes"
by Crebillon
(motive, greed for power, the important role b3ing
that of the perfidious instigator) .
(3) — Hatred Between Relatives for Reasons of
Self-Interest:— "La Maison d'Argile" (Fabre, 1907).
Example from fiction: "Mon Frere" (Mercereau).
B— Hatred of Father and Son:— (1)— Of the Son
for the Father: — "Three Punishments in One," by
Calderon.
Historic example: Louis XI and Charles
VII. A part of "La Terre" by Zola and of "Le Maitre"
by Jean Jullien.

(2)— Mutual Hatred:— "Life
Historic instance:

is a Dream,"
by
Jerome and Victor
Bonaparte (a reduction of hatred to simple disagree
ment). This nuance appears to me to be one of the
finest, although one of the least regarded by our
writers.
(3)— Hatred of Daughter for Father:— "The Cenci,"
Calderon.

4

80

THIRTY'SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

by Shelley, (parricide as a means of escape from
incest).
Grandson :•—
for
C— Hatred
of
Grandfather
Metastasio's "Cyrus"; the story of Amulius in the
beginning of Titus Livius (motive, tyrannical avarice).
Hatred of uncle for nephew : "The Death of Cansa," by
Crichna Cavi. One of the facets of "Hamlet."
for Son in-law: —
D— Hatred of Father-in-law
Alfieri's "Agis and Saul" (motive, tyrannical avarice).
Historical example: Caesar and Pompey. Hatred of
"La Mer" (Jean
two brothers-in-law,
ex-rivals:
—
Jullien, 1891) the only modern drama, I may note in
passing, in which one finds emotion increasing after
the death of the principal character. In this respect
it conforms to reality, in which we may experience
shock or alarm, or cry out in dread, but in which we
do not weep, nor feel sorrow to the full, until after
ward, all hope being forever ended.
E — Hatred of Mother in-law for Daughter-in-law: —
Corneille's "Rodogune" (motive, tyrannical avarice).
F—Infanticide:— "Conte de Noel" (Linant, 1899). A
part of the "Powers of Darkness."
I will not repeat the list of degrees of relationship
into which this situation might be successively trans
sisters, one
ferred. The case of hatred between
—
frequent enough, will offer,
even after "Le Carnaval
—
des Enfants" (de Bouhelier)
an excellent opportunity
for a study of feminine enmities, so lasting and so
cruel; hatred of mother and daughter, of brother and
sister, will be not less interesting; the same may be
said for the converse of each class which has furnished
May there not be an especially fine
our examples.
dramatic study in the deep subject, — heretofore so
vulgar because treated by vulgar hands, — the antip
athy of the mother and the husband of a young
woman? Does it not represent the natural conflict
between the ideal, childhood, purity, on the one hand.

THIRTEENTH SITUATION

.*

51

and on the other, Life, vigorous and fertile, deceptive

but irresistibly alluring ?
Next the motive of hatred, changing a little, maj
vary from the everlasting "love of power" alleged in
nearly all extant examples, and, what is worse, invari
ably painted in the strained attitudes of noe-classicism.*
parent, torn by
The character of the common
affection for both adversaries in these struggles, has
been little modified since the day when Aeschylus led
forth, from the tomb to which tradition had con
signed her, his majestic Jocaste.
The roles of two
parents at enmity could well be revived also. And I
find no one but Beaumont and Fletcher who has drawn
vigorously the instigators of such impious struggle?"
characters whose infamy is sufficient to be well worthy
of attention, nevertheless.
With the enmities of kinsmen are naturally connected
the enmities which spring up between friends. This
nuance will be found in the following situation
*Neo-Classicism : Belonging to or designating the revival of
classical taste and style in art.

FOURTEENTH SITUATION
RIVALRY OF KINSMEN
(The Preferred Kinsman; the Rejected Kinsman; the
Object)

This situation seems, at first glance, to present ten

Does not Love,
times the attraction of the preceding.
the
as well as Jealousy, augment its effect? Here
charms of the Beloved shine amid the blood of battles
fought for her sake. What startled hesitancies, what
perplexities are hers ; what fears of avowing a prefer
ence, lest pitiless rage be unchained!
Yes, the Beloved one, the "Object" — to use the philo
sophic name applied to her in the seventeenth century
— will here be added to our list of characters. But
Parent, even if he does not dis
.
.
. the Common
appear, must lose the greater part of his importance;
the Instigators will pale and vanish in the central
radiance of the fair Object. Doubtless the "love
scenes" will please, by their contrast to the violence of
the play ; but the dramatic purist may raise his brows,
and find— perhaps — these turtle-dove interludes a
trifle colorless when set in the crimson frame-work of
fratricide.
Furthermore, there persists in the psychologist's
mind the idea that Rivalry, in such a struggle, is no
more than a pretext, the mask of a darker, more
ancient hatred, a physiological antipathy, one might
say, derived from the parents. Two brothers, two
near relatives, do not proceed, on account of a woman,
52

FOURTEENTH STTUATION

53

Now, if we
to kill each other, unless predisposed.
thus reduce the motive to a mere pretext, the Object
at once pales and diminishes in importance, and we
find ourselves returning to the Thirteenth Situation.
Is the Fourteenth, then, limited to but one class, a
mere derivative of the preceding? No; it possesses,
fortunately, some germs of savagery which permit of
its development in several directions. Through them
it may trend upon "Murderous Adultery," "Adultery
Threatened," and especially upon "Crimes of Love"
(incests, etc). Its true form and value may be ascer
tained by throwing these new tendencies into relief.
A (1) — Malicious Rivalry of a Brother: — "Britanby Delpit
nicus"; "Les Maucroix"
(the Common
Parent here gives place to a pair of ex-rivals, who be
come almost the Instigators) ; "Boislaurier" (Richard,
From fiction: "Pierre et Jean," by de
1884).
Maupassant.
Case in which the rivalry is without
hatred: "1812" (Nigond, 1910).
Rivalry
of
Two
Brothers: —
(2) — Malicious
"Agathocle," "Don Pedre," Adelaide du Guesclin" and
"Amelie," all by Voltaire, who dreamed of carving a
kingdom all his own, from this sub-class of a single
situation.
(3) — Rivalry of Two Brothers, With Adultery on the
Part of One: — "Pelleas et Melisande" by Maeterlinck.
(4) — Rivalry of Sisters: — "La Souris" (Pailleron,
1887) ; "L'Enchantement" (Bataille, 1900) ; "Le Demon
du Foyer" (G. Sand) . Of aunt and niece : "Le Risque"
(Coolus, 1909).
B (1) — Rivalry of Father and Son, for an Unmar
ried Woman: — Metastasio's "Antigone";
"Les Fossiles" (F. de Curel) ; "La Massiere" (Lemaitre, 1905) ;
"La Dette" (Trarieux, 1909 ; "Papa" (de Flers and de
Caillavet, 1911) ; Racine's "Mithridate," in which the
rivalry is triple, between the father and each of the

54

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

sons, and between the two sons.

Partial example

:

the

beginning of Dumas' "Pere Prodigue."
(2) — Rivalry of Father and Son, for a Married
Woman:—"Le Vieil Homme" (Porto-Riche, 1911).
(3) — Case Similar to the Two Foregoing, But in
Which the Object is Already the Wife of the Father.
(This goes beyond adultery, and tends to result in
for
incest, but the purity of the passion preserves,
dramatic effect, a fine distinction between this sub
class and Situation XXVI) : — Euripides' "Phenix" ; (a
concubine is here the object of rivalry) ; Schiller's
"Don Carlos" ; Alfieri's "Philip II."
(4) — Rivalry of Mother and Daughter: — "L'Autre
Danger" (Donnay, 1902).
C— Rivalry of Cousins: (which in reality falls into
the following class) : — "The Two Noble Kinsmen,"
by Beaumont and Fletcher.
D —Rivalry of Friends: — Shakespeare's "Two Gen
tlemen of Verona"; "Aimer sans Savoir Qui" by Lope
de Vega; Lessing's "Damon"; "Le Coeur a ses Raisons"
(de Flers and de Caillavet, 1902) ; "Une Femme Passa"
(Coolus, 1910)

FIFTEENTH SITUATION
MURDEROUS ADULTERY
(Elements:

Two Adulterers; a Betrayed Husband or

Wife)
This, to my mind, is the only strongly appealing
form in which adultery can be presented ; otherwise is
it not a mere species of house-breaking, the less heroic
in that the Object of theft is an accomplice, and that
the household door, already thrown open by treach
ery, requires not even a push of the shoulder ? Whereas
this treachery becomes at least logical and endurable
in so far as it is a genuinely sincere folly, impassioned
enough to prefer assassination to dissimulation and a
base sharing of love.
A (1) — The Slaying of a Husband by, or for, a
Paramour: — the "Agamemnons"
of Aeschylus, of
Seneca and of Alfieri ; Webster's "Vittoria Corombona" ;
"Pierre Pascal"; "Les Emigrants" (Hirsch, 1909) ;
"L'Impasse" (Fread Amy, 1909) ; "Partage de Midi"
(Paul Claudel) ; "Amour" (Leon Hennique, 1890) ; the
beginning of the "Powers of Darkness."
Historic
example, with pride and shame as motives for the
crime: the legend of Gyges and Candaules.
From
fiction: the first part of "Therese Raquin."
(2) — The Slaying of a Trusting Lover: — "Samson
et Dalila" (opera by Saint-Saens, 1890.)
B— Slaying of a Wife for a Paramour, and in SelfInterest: — Seneca's "Octavia" and also Alfieri's; "La
Lutte pour la Vie" by Daudet (in which cupidity
55

56

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

"The Schism of England " by
" by Gozzi.
Narrative example :
Calderon ; "Zobeide
Bluebeard. Historic: the murder of Galeswinthe.
Hints for varying and modifying this situation: —
dominates

adultery)

;

The betrayed husband or wife may be either more or
less powerful, more or less sympathetic in character,
than the slayer. The blindness of the intended victim
may be more or less complete at various moments of
the action ; if it be dispelled, partly or fully, it may be
by chance, by some imprudent act of the guilty ones,
by a warning, etc.
Between the victim and the intruder, ties of affec
tion, of duty, of gratitude, may 1 ave previously ex
isted; ties very real to one or the other of the two.
They may be relatives ; they may find themselves united
The
by some work or responsibility in common.
Victim, whether he be pursued openly or secretly, will
be, doubtless, the object of an old rancor, either on the
part of the consort or of the intruder ; the origin of this
rancor may be in any one of the imaginable offenses
by which a human being is wounded in his family affec
tions, his loves, his ideals, etc., or in his pride of birth,
of name, of achievement; in his interests, (money,
property, power, freedom) ; in any one of the external
radiations of life.
Of the two adulterers, one may be but an instrument
—impassioned or resigned, unconscious or involuntary
— of the other, and may later be rejected, the end being
attained; the blow may be struck by one of the two
traitors alone, or it may be that neither of them has
stained his own hands with the crime, which has been
committed by a new character, perhaps unintentionally,
or perhaps from love of one of the two Adulterers, who
has utilized and directed this passion, or has let it move
of its own accord toward the desired and criminal end.
A multitude of other characters will be, in varying
degrees, the means employed, the obstacles, secondary

FIFTEENTH SITUATION

57

victims, and accomplices in the sinister deed ; the deed
itself may be brought about according to the author's
choice among the numberless circumstances which the
Law has foreseen, with divers details such as court

trials suggest.

If

a more complicated action is desired, interweave
(as Hennique has done) a rivalry of Kinsmen, an un
natural love (see Euripides' Chrysippe), an ambitious
purpose and a conspiracy.

SIXTEENTH SITUATION
MADNESS
(Elements:

Madman and Victim)

The origin of certain human actions lies hidden in
fearful mystery ; a mystery wherein the ancients
the cruel smile of a god, and
wherein our scientists, like the Chinese philosophers,
the desires, prolonged and
believe they recognize
A startling awakening it
hereditary, of an ancestor.
is for Reason, when she finds on all sides her destiny
strewn with corpses or with dishonors, which the
Other, the unknown, has scattered at his pleasure.
At this calamity, greater than death, how our kindred
must weep and tremble ; what terror and suspense must
arise in their minds! And the victims, whose cries
are lost in the mute heavens ; the beloved ones pursued
in unreasoning rage which they cannot comprehend!
What variations of the inconscient are here : folly, pos
session, divine blindness, hypnosis, intoxication, forgetf ulness !
A (1) — Kinsmen Slain in Madness: — "Athamas"
and the "Weavers of Nets" by Aeschylus; "Hercules
Furens" by Euripides and by Seneca; "Ion" by
Euripides.
(2) — A Lover Slain in Madness: — "La Fille Eliza,"
by Edmond de Goncourt; "La Tentation de Vivre"
(Louis Ernault). A lover on the point of slaying his
mistress in madness: Example from fiction: "La Bete
believed they discerned

58

SIXTEENTH SITUATION

59

Humaine."
Familiar instances: Jack the Ripper; the
Spaniard of Montmartre, etc.
(3) — Slaying or Injuring of a Person not Hated: —
"Monsieur Bute" (Biollay, 1890). Destruction of a
work: "Hedda Gabler."
B — Disgrace Brought Upon Oneself Through Mad
ness: — Aeschylus' "Thracians"; Sophocles' "Ajax";to
some extent "Saul" (Gide).
C — Loss of Loved Ones Brought About by Madness:
—"Sakuntala" by Kalidasa, (form, amnesia). The
philtre of Hagen, in Wagner.
D — Madness Brought on by Fear of Hereditary
Insanity:— "L'Etau" (Andre Sardou, 1909).
The case of A (3), transferred to the past and
treated according to a quid-pro-quo process, is that of
one of the merriest comedies of the nineteenth century,
"L' Affaire de la rue de Lourcine" by Labiche.
Numberless examples of this Sixteenth Situation
have filled the disquieting pages of alienists' journals.
Mental diseases, manias of various types, offer power
ful dramatic effects which have not yet been exploited.
These furnish, doubtless, but points of departure
toward the Situation whose real investiture takes place
at the moment of the hero's restoration to reason, —
which is to say, to suffering. But if it ever happens
that these three phases — the etiology of delirium, its
access, and the return to a normal condition — are
treated with equal strength and vigor, what an admir
able work will result !
The first of the three stages, which bears upon the
explanations of insanity, has been variously held to be
divine (by the Greeks), demoniac (by the Church), and,
in our own times, hereditary
and pathological.
Hypnotism has recently created another nuance; the
hypnotist here forms a substitute, — a sorry one, it is
true, — for divinity or demon. Drunkenness furnishes
us a nuance equally unfamiliar to Greece; what is to

60

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

day more commonplace, and at the same time more ter
rible, than the disclosure of an important secret or
the committing of a criminal act, while under the in
fluence of drink ?
Is it necessary to say that all ties, all interests, all
human desires, may be represented crossed and illumin
ated by the light of dementia ?
For the rest, this situation of Madness is far from
having been neglected in our theater.
Shakespeare,
in his most personal dramas, has made use of insanity
in the leading roles. Lady Macbeth is a somnambu
list and dies in hysteria, her husband is a victim of
hallucinations ; the same may be said of Hamlet, who is
a lypemaniac besides; of Timon also; Othello is an
epileptic and King Lear completely deranged.
It is on
this account that the great William is so dangerous a
model (Goethe would not read him more than once a
year). He has played, to some extent, the same role
as Michael-Angelo, — he has exaggerated the springs of
action to the farthest limits of reality, beyond which
his disciples fall immediately into mere ridiculous
affectation.
On the other hand, if we except the pretext of study
ing insanity in itself, which "Ajax" has furnished
from Astydamus to Ennius, and from Ennius to
Emperor Augustus, I find nothing "Shakespearian" in
the drama of antiquity except "Orestes."
All other
characters are in the enjoyment of their senses, and
do not thereby become any less pathetic. "CEdipus"
alone shows, in default of abnormality in the hero's
psychologic constitution, external events of an extra
ordinary character (a resource since so largely used
by the Romanticists of 1830 and later) . But the rest
of the antique dramatic types are evolved in accordance
with normal passions, and under objective conditions
relatively common.

SEVENTEENTH SITUATION
FATAL IMPRUDENCE
(The Imprudent

;

the Victim or the Object Lost)

To which are sometimes added "The Counsellor," a
person of wisdom, who opposes the imprudence, "The
Instigator," wicked, selfish or thoughtless, and the
usual string of Witnesses, secondary Victims, Instru
ments, etc.

— Imprudence the Cause of Ones Own Mis
fortune: — Sophocles' "Eumele"; Euripides' "Phaeton"
A

(1)

(here the Counsellor is blended with the Instrumental
character, in which, bound by a too-hasty oath, he finds
himself in Situation XXIII, A (2), —obliged to sacrifice
a kinsman to keep a vow) ; "The Master Builder," by
Ibsen. From comedy: "L'Indiscret" (See, 1903).
(2) — Imprudence the Cause of Ones Own Dishonor:
— "La Banque de l'Univers" (Grenet-Danc6urt, 1886).
From fiction : "L' Argent" by Zola. Historic : Ferdinand
de Lesseps.

B (1) — Curiosity the Cause of Ones Own Misfor
"Semele."
Historic examples
tune: — Aeschylus'
(which rise to the Twentieth Situation, "Sacrifices to
the Ideal")*: the deaths of many scholars and scientists.
(2) — Loss of the Possession of a Loved One, Through
Curiosity: — "Psyche" (borrowed from the account
which La Fontaine drew from Apuleius, himself the
debtor of Lucius of Patras, and dramatized by Corneille, Moliere and Quinault) ; "Esclarmonde"
(Mas
senet, 1889).
Legendary example: Orpheus bringing
61

v^

62

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

This nuance tends toward Situations
back Eurydice.
and XXXIII, "Mistaken Jealousy" and "Judi

XXXII

cial Error."
C
(1) — Curiosity the Cause of Death or Misfortune
to Others: — Goethe's "Pandora" and also Voltaire's;
"The Wild Duck" by Ibsen. Legendary example: Eve.
(2) — Imprudence the Cause of a Relative's Death: —
"La Mere Meurtriere de son Enfant" (a fourteenthcentury Miracle of Notre-Dame) ; "On ne Badine pas
avec l'Amour" (de Musset) ; "Renee Mauperin," by the
Goncourts. Familiar instances : blunders in the care of
"Louise Leclerq," by Verlaine. The
sick persons.
"Damaged Goods"
cause of another's misfortune:
(Brieux, 1905).
(3) — Imprudence the Cause of a Lover's Death: —
"Samson" by Voltaire; "La Belle aux Cheveux d'Or"
(Arnould, 1882).
(4) — Credulity the Cause of Kinsmen's Deaths: —
"Pelias" by Sophocles and "The Peliades" by Euripides.
From fiction (credulity the cause of misfortune to
fellow-citizens) : "Port-Tarascon."
Establish in each of the preceding sub-classes equiva
in single
lents to those cases which are presented
instances in one class only, and we have the following
subjects: — By Imprudence (meaning imprudence pure
and simple, unconnected with curiosity or credulity) to
cause misfortune to others ; to lose possession of a loved
one (lover, wife or husband, friend, benefactor, protege,
etc.) ; to cause the death of a relative (any degree of
kinship may be chosen) ; to cause the death of a loved
one,. By Curiosity
(unmixed with imprudence or
credulity) to cause the dishonor of a relative (the vari
ous kinds pf dishonor are numerous enough, touching
as they do upon probity, upon courage, upon modesty,
upon loyalty) ; to cause the dishonor of a loved one ; to
cause ones own dishonor. To cause these dishonors by
pure Credulity (unmixed with imprudence or curios

Seventeenth situation

&

ity).

An examination of the Twelfth Situation will
give us a primary idea of the way in which Ruse may
By Credulity also to
be used to gain this credulity.
cause ones own misfortune, or lose possession of a loved
one, or cause misfortune to others, or cause the death
of a loved one.
Let us now pass to the causes which may precipitate
— as readily as curiosity, credulity, or pure imprud
ence- — an overhanging catastrophe. These causes are:
—the infraction of a prohibition or law previously made
by a divinity ; the deadly effect of the act upon him who
commits it (an effect due to causes perhaps mechanical,
perhaps biological, perhaps judicial, perhaps martial
etc.) ; the deadly consequences of the act for the
kindred or the beloved of him who commits it; a sin
previously committed, consciously or unconsciously
and which is about to be revealed and punished.
Besides curiosity and credulity, other motives may
determine the imprudence; in "The Trachiniae," for
instance, it is jealousy.
The same role might be given
to any one of the passions, the emotions, the desires,
the needs, the tastes, the human weaknesses; — sleep,
hunger, muscular activity, gluttony, lust, coquetry,
As to the final disaster, it may
childish simplicity.
assume many aspects, since it may fall in turn upon
physical, moral or social well-being, whether by the
destruction of happiness or honor, of property or
power.

In the present situation, the Instigator,— who never
theless is not essential, — may become worthy of figur
ing even as the protagonist ; such is the case of Medea
in "Pelias." This is perhaps the most favorable aspect
in which the "villain" can be presented; imagine, for
instance, an Iago becoming the principal character of
a play (as Satan is of the world) ! The difficulty will
be to find a sufficient motive for him ; ambition, (partly
the case in Richard III) is not always a convincing one,

64

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

because of its "a priori" way of proceeding; jealousy
and vengeance seem a trifle sentimental for this dem
oniac figure ; misanthropy is too philosophic and honor
able; self-interest (the case of Pelias) is more appropri
ate. But envy, — envy, which in the presence of friend
ly solicitude feels but the more keenly the smart of its
wounds, — envy studied in its dark and base endeavors,
in the shame of defeat, in its cowardice, and ending
finally in crime, — here, it seems to me, is the ideal
motive.

EIGHTEENTH SITUATION
INVOLUNTARY CRIMES OF LOVE
(The Lover

;

the Beloved

;

the Revealer)

This and the following situation stand out as the
most fantastic and improbable of all the silhouettes
Nevertheless they are, in
upon our dramatic horizon.
themselves, quite admissible, and at least not rarer
today than they were in heroic times, through adultery
and prostitution, which never nourished more general
ly than at present.
It is merely the disclosure which
is less frequent. Yet many of us have seen certain
marriages, apparently suitable, planned and arranged,
as it were, by relatives or friends of the families, yet
obstinately opposed, avoided and broken off by the
parents, seemingly unreasonable, but in reality only too
certain of the consanguinity of the lovers.
Such revel
ations, then, still take place, although without their
antique and startling eclat, thanks to modern custom
and our prudent prudery.
Its reputation for fabulous monstrosity was in
reality attached to our Eighteenth Situation by the
unequalled celebrity of the theme of "OEdipus," which
Sophocles treated in a style almost romantic, and which
his imitators have ever since overloaded with fanciful
arabesques, more and more chimerical and extra

ordinary.
This situation and the following — as indeed to some
extent all thirty-six — may be represented, as the
author chooses, in one of two lights. In the first, the
6

65

66

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

fatal error is revealed, simultaneously to the spectator
and to the character, only after it is irreparable, as in
Class A ; and here the state of mind strongly recalls the
Sixteenth. In the second, the spectator, informed of
the truth, sees the character walk unconsciously to
ward the crime, as though in a sinister sort of blindman's-buff, as in Classes B, C and D.
A (1) — Discovery That One Has Married Ones
Mother: — the "OEdipus" of Aeschylus, of Sophocles,
of Seneca, of Anguillara, of Corneille, of Voltaire, not
to speak of those of Achaeus, Philocles, Melitus,
Xenocles, Nicomachus, Carcinus, Diogenes, Theodecte,
Julius Caesar ; nor of those of Jean Prevost, Nicolas de
Sainte-Marthe, Lamothe, Ducis, J. Chenier, etc. The
greatest praise of Sophocles consists in the astonish
ment we feel that neither the many imitations, nor
the too well-known legend of the abandonment on
Cithaeron, nor the old familiar myth of the Sphinx,
nor the difference in the ages of the wedded pair, — that
none of these things has made his work appear un
natural or unconvincing.
(2) — Discovery That One Has Had a Sister as Mis
tress: — Tasso's "Torrismond" ; "The Bride of Messina"
This case, obviously a more frequent one,
by Schiller.
becomes unconvincing in the latter drama, when com
bined with the Nineteenth Situation. Example from
fiction: "L'Enfant Naturel," by Sue.
B
(1) — Discovery That One Has Married Ones
Sister: — "Le Manage d' Andre" (Lemaire and de
Rouvre, 1882). This being a comedy, the error is dis
covered in time to De remedied, and the play "ends
"Abufar" by Ducis, which also falls under
happily."
a preceding classification.
(2) — The Same Case, in Which the Crime Has Been
Villainously Planned by a Third Person: — "Heraclius"
(this gives, despite its genius, rather the feeling of a
nightmare than of a terrible re?lity) .

EIGHTEENTH SITUATION
(3)

— Being Upon

67

the Point of Taking a Sister, Un

The
knowingly,
as Mistress: — Ibsen's "Ghosts."
mother, a knowing witness, hesitates to reveal the
danger, for fear of subjecting the son to a fatal shock.
C — Being Upon the Point of Violating, Unknowingly,
a Daughter: — Partial example: "La Dame aux Domino
Rose" (Bouvier, 1882).
D
(1) — Being Upon the Point of Committing an
Adultery Unknowingly (the only cases I have found in
all drama) : — "Le Roi Ceff" and "L' Amour des Trois
Oranges," both by Gozzi.
(2) — Adultery Committed Unknowingly: — probably
the "Alcmene" of Aeschylus; "Le Bon Roi Dagobert"
(Rivoire, 1908) . From fiction : the end of "The Titan,''
by Jean-Paul Richter.
The various modifications of incest and other for
bidden loves, which will be found in Situation XXVI,
may be adapted in the same manner as those here
classified.
We have seen above instances of adultery committed
through a mistake on the part of the wife ; it might also
be through a mistake by the husband.
This error is
especially likely to be made by that one of the two
adulterers who is unmarried; what is more common,
for example, in the life of "pleasure," than to discover
— a little tardily — that ones mistress is a married
woman ?
Ignorance of the sex of the beloved is the point upon
which "Mademoiselle de Maupin" turns ; there is in the
first place a mistake (comedy), upon which are built
the obsidional struggles of a soul (tragi-comedy), from
which there finally results, when the truth is disclosed
a brief tragic denouement.

NINETEENTH SITUATION
SLAYING OF A KINSMAN UNRECOGNISED
(The Slayer

;

the Unrecognized Victim)

Whereas the Eighteenth Situation attains its highest
degree of emotion after the accomplishment of the
act, (doubtless because all the persons concerned in it
survive, and the horror of it lies chiefly in the conse
quences), the Nineteenth, on the contrary, in which a
victim is to perish and in which the interest increases
by reason of the blind premeditation, becomes more
pathetic in the preparations for the crime than in the
results. This permits a happy ending, without the
necessity of recourse, as in the Eighteenth, to a comedyA simple recognition of one char
process of error.
acter by another will suffice, — of which our Situation
XIX is, in effect, but a development.
A (1) — Being Upon the Point of Slaying a
Daughter Unknowingly, by Command of a Divinity or
an Oracle: — Metastasio's "Demophon." The ignorance
of the kinship springs from a substitution of infants;
the interpretation of the oracle's words is erroneous;
the "jeune premiere," at one point in the action, be
lieves herself the sister of her fiance. This linking of
three or four mistakes (unknown kinship, in the
special light of the situation we are now studying, a
supposed danger of incest, as in B 2 of the preceding,
and finally a misleading ambiguity of words, as in the
majority of comedies) suffices to constitute what is
called "stirring" action, characteristic of the intrigues
68

NINETEENTH SITUATION

69

brought back into vogue by the Second Empire, and
over whose intricate entanglements our chroniclers
waxed so naively enthusiastic.
(2) — Through Political Necessity: — "Les Guebres
and"Les Lois de Minos" by Voltaire.
(3) — Through a Rivalry in Love: — "La Petite
Mionne" (Richebourg, 1890).
(4)_Through Hatred of the Lover of the Un.
recognized Daughter: — "Le Roi s'amuse" (in which
the discovery takes place after the slaying) .
B (1)—Being Upon the Point of Killing a Son Unknowingly: — The "Telephus" of Aeschylus and of
Sophocles (with incest as the alternative of this
crime) ; Euripides' "Cresphontes" ; the "Meropes" of
Maffei, of Voltaire and of Alfieri ; Sophocles' "Creusa" ;
Euripides' "Ion."
In Metastasio's "Olympiad" this
subject is complicated by a "Rivalry of Friends".
A Son Slain Without Being Recognized: — Partial ex
ample: the third act of "Lucrece Borgia"; "The 24th of
February," by Werner.
(2)—The Same Case as B (1), Strengthened by
"Euryale" ;
Instigations : — Sophocles'
Machiavellian
Euripides' "JEgeus."
(3)—The Same Case as B (2), Intermixed With
Hatred of Kinsmen (that of grandfather for grand
son) : — Metastasio's "Cyrus."
C — Being Upon the Point of Slaying a Brother Un
knowingly:
(1) — Brothers Slaying in Anger: — The
"Alexanders" of Sophocles and of Euripides.
(2) —
A Sister Slaying Through Professional Duty: — "The
Priestesses" of Aeschylus; "Iphigenia in Tauris," by
Euripides and by Goethe, and that projected by
Racine.
D — Slaying of a Mother Unrecognized: — Voltaire's
"Semiramis"; a partial example: the denouement of
"Lucrece Borgia."
E—A Father Slain Unknowingly, Through Machia

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

70

vellian Advice: (see XVII): — Sophocles' "Pelias" and
Euripides' "Peliades" ; Voltaire's "Mahomet" (in which
the hero is also upon the point of marrying his sister
unknowingly).
The Simple Slaying of a Father Un
—
recognized: Legendary example: Laius. From ro
mance: "The Legend of Saint Julian the Hospitaller."
The Same Case Reduced From Murder to Simple Insult :
— "Le Pain d'Autrui" (after Turgenieff, by Ephraim
Being Upon the Point of Slaying
and Schutz, 1890).
— "Israel" (Bernstein, 1908).
Unknowingly:
a Father
F (1) — A Grandfather Slain Unknowingly, in
Instigation: — "Les BurVengeance .and Through
graves" (Hugo).
(2) — Slain Involuntarily: — Aeschylus' "Polydectes."

Father-In-Law
(3) — A
Sophocles' "Amphitryon."

Killed

Involuntarily: —

(1) — Involuntary Killing of a Loved Woman: —
Sophocles' "Procris."
Epic example: Tancred and
Legendary ex
Clorinda, in "Jerusalem
Delivered."
ample (with change of the sex of the person loved) :

G

Hyacinthus.
(2) — Being Upon the Point of Killing a Lover Un
recognized: — "The Blue Monster" by Gozzi.
(3) — Failure to Rescue an Unrecognized Son: —
"Saint Alexis" (a XIV Century Miracle of NotreDame) ; "La Voix du Sang" (Rachilde).
Remarkable is the liking of Hugo (and consequently
of his imitators) for this somewhat rare situation.
Each of the ten dramas of the old Romanticist containw
it ; in two of them, "Hernani" and "Torquemada," it is,
in a manner accessory to the Seventeenth (Imprud
ence), fatal to the hero also; in four ("Marion Delorme," "Angelo," "La Esmeralda," "Ruy Bias") this
case of involuntary injury to a loved one supplies all the
action and furnishes the best episodes; in four others
("Le Roi s'amuse," "Marie Tudor," "Lucrece Borgia"
"Les Burgraves") it serves furthermore as denoue

NINETEENTH SITUATION

71

ment.
It would seem, indeed, that drama, for Hugo,
consists in this: the causing, directly or indirectly, of
the death of a loved one ; and, in the work wherein he
has accumulated the greatest number of theatrical
effects — in "Lucrece Borgia" — we see the same situa
tion returning no less than five times.
Near the first
part of Act I, Gennaro permits his unrecognized
mother to be insulted ; in the second part, he himself in
sults her, not knowing her for his mother ; in Act II she
demands, and is granted, the death of her unrecognized
son, then finds she has no recourse but to kill him her
self, then is again insulted by him; finally, in Act III,
she poisons him, and, still unknown, is insulted,
threatened and slain by him.
Be it noted that Shakespeare has not in a single in
stance employed this Nineteenth Situation, an alto
gether accidental one, having no bearing upon his
powerful studies of the will.

TWENTIETH SITUATION
SELF-SACRIFICE FOR AN IDEAL
(The Hero

;

the Ideal

;

the "Creditor" or the Person or

Thing Sacrificed)
The four themes of Immolation, of which this is the
first, bring before us three corteges: — Gods (XX and
XXIII), Kindred (XXI and XXIII), and Desires
(XXII). The field of conflict is no longer the visible
world, but the Soul.
Of these four subjects, none is nobler than this of
our Twentieth Situation, — all for an ideal! What the
ideal may be, whether political or religious, whether it
be called Honor or Piety, is of little importance.
It
exacts the sacrifice of all ties, of interest, passion, life
itself, — far better, however, under one of the three
following forms, if it be tarnished with the slightest,
even although the most sublime, egoism.
A (1) — Sacrifice of Life for the Sake of Ones
Word: — The "Regulus" of Pradon and also of Metastasio; the end of "Hernani" (Carthage and Don Ruy
Gomez are the "Creditors"). Is it not surprising that
a greater number of examples do not at once present
themselves to us? This fatality, the work of the
victim himself, and in which the victory is won over
Self, — is it not worthy to illuminate the stage with its
sacrificial flames ? There is, nevertheless, no necessity
for choosing a hero of an almost too-perfect type, such
as Regulus.
(2) — Life Sacrificed for the Success of Ones People:
72

TWENTIETH SITUATION

— "The Waiting- Women" by Aeschylus;

73

"Protesilas"

by Euripides; "Themistocles" by Metastasio. Partial
examples: "Iphigenia in Aulis," by Euripides and by
Racine. Historic examples: Codrus; Curtius; Latour
d'Auvergne.
For the Happiness of Ones People: —
The "Suffering Christ" of St. Gregory Nazianzen.
(3)— Life Sacrificed in Filial Piety:— "The Phoenic
the "Antigones" of
ian Women" by Aeschylus;
Sophocles and Euripides; of Alamanni and Alfieri.
(4) — Life Sacrificed for the Sake of Ones Faith: —
"The Miracle of St. Ignace of Antioch" (XIV Century) ;
"Vive le Roi" (Han Rymer, 1911) ; "Cesar Birotteau"
(Fabre, after Balzac, 1911) ; "The Constant Prince" by
Calderon; "Luther" by Werner. Familiar instances:
all martyrs, whether to religion or science. In fiction :
"L'CEuvre" by Zola. For the Sake of Ones King:—
"L'Enfant du Temple" (de Pohles).
B (1) — Both Love and Life Sacrificed for Ones
Faith: — "Polyeucte."
In fiction "L'Evangeliste"
(sacrifice of family and future for ones faith).
(2) — Both Love and Life Sacrificed to a Cause: —
"Les Fils de Jahel" (Mme. Armand, 1886).
(3) — Love Sacrificed to Interests of State: — This is
the favorite motif of Corneille, as in "Othon," "Sertorius," "Sophonisbe," "Pulcherie," "Tite et Berenice."
Add to these the "Berenice" of Racine and the "Sophon
isbe" of Trissino, that of Alfieri and that of Mairet;
Metastasio's "Achilles in Scyro" and his "Dido;" Ber
lioz' "Troyons" (the best tragedy of his century) ;
"L'Imperatrice" (Mendes). The "Creditor" in this
sub-class, remaining abstract, is easily
confounded
with the Ideal and the Hero ; the "Persons Sacrificed,"
on the contrary, become visible; these are Plautine,
Viriate, Syphax and Massinisse, Berenice, Deidamie.
In comedy: "S. A. R." (Chancel, 1908).
C — Sacrifice of Weil-Being Ao Duty: "Resurrection"
by Tolstoi ; "L'Apprentie" (Geffroy, 1908).

74

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

D— The Ideal of "Honor" Sacrificed to the Ideal of
"Faith"; — Two powerful examples, which for secon
dary reasons did not attain success (because the public
ear was incapable of perceiving a harmony pitched so
high in the scale of sentiment) : "Theodore" by Corneille and "The Virgin Martyr" by Massinger. Partial
example: the good hermit Abraham in Hroswitha.

TWENTY-FIRST SITUATION
SELF-SACRIFICE FOR KINDRED
(The Hero; the Kinsman; the "Creditor" or
the Person or Thing Sacrificed)

— Life Sacrificed for that of a Relative or a
Loved One: — The "Alcestes" of Sophocles, of Euri
A

(1)

pides, of Buchanan, of Hardy, of Racine (projected), of
Quinault, of Lagrange-Chancel, of Boissy, of Coypel,

of Saint-Foix, of Dorat, of Gluck, of H. Lucas, of
Vauzelles, etc.
(2) — Life Sacrificed for the Happiness of a Relative
or a Loved One: — "L'Ancien" by Richepin. Two sym
metrical works are "Smilis" (Aicard, 1884), in which
the husband sacrifices himself, and "Le Divorce de
Sarah Moore" (Rozier, Paton and Dumas fils), in which
the wife sacrifices herself. Examples from fiction and
analogous to these two dramas are "Great Expecta
tions" by Dickens and "La Joie de Vivre" by Zola. Com
mon examples : workmen in dangerous occupations.
B (1) —Ambition Sacrificed for the Happiness of a
Parent: — "Les Freres Zemganno" by Edmond de Goncourty. This ends with a denounement the opposite of
that of "L'CEuvre."
(2) — Ambition Sacrificed for the Life of a Parent: —
"Madame de Maintenon" (Coppee, 1881).
C
(1) — Love Sacrificed for the Sake of a Parent's
Life: — "Diane" by Augier; "Martyre" (Dennery,
1886).
(2) — For the Happiness of Ones
75

Child: — "Le Re

76

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

veil" (Hervieu, 1905); "La Fugitive" (Picard, 1911).
For the Happiness of a Loved One: — "Cyrano de Bergerac" by Rostand ; "Le Droit au Bonheur" (C. Lemonnier, 1907;.
(3) — The Same Sacrifice as 2, But Caused by Unjust
Laws: — "La Loi de l'Homme" by Hervieu.
D (1) — Life and Honor Sacrificed for the Life of
a Parent or Loved One : — "Le Petit Jacques."
Case in
which the loved one is guilty : "La Charbonniere" (Cremieux, 1884) ; "Le Frere d'Armes" (Garaud, 1887) ; "Le
Chien de Garde" (Richepin, 1889). The Same Sacrifice
Made for the Honor of a Loved One: — "Pierre Vaux"
A similar sacrifice, but of repu
(Jonathan, 1882).
only:
tation
"La Cornette" (Mile, and M. Ferrier,
1909).

(2) — Modesty Sacrificed for the Life of a Relative or
a Loved One: — Shakespeare's "Measure for Measure;"
Euripides' "Andromache" and also Racine's; "Pertharite" by Corneille ; "La Tosca" (Sardou, 1889) . In
fiction : "Le Huron" by Voltaire.

TWENTY-SECOND SITUATION
ALL SACRIFICED FOR A PASSION
(The Lover; the Object of the Fatal Passion;
the Person or Thing Sacrificed)
(1) — Religious Vows of Chastity Broken for a
Passion: — "Jocelyn" by Godard. From fiction: "La
In comedy : "Dhourtta
Faute de l'Abbe Mouret."

A

Narttaka."

(2)— A Vow of Purity Broken :— "Tannhauser." Re
spect for a Priest Destroyed: —one aspect of "La Conquete de Plassans."

(3) — A Future Ruined by a Passion: — "Manon" by
Massenet ; "Sapho" by Daudet ; "La Griff e" (Bernstein.
1906) ; the works of Louys in general.
•
(4) — Power Ruined by Passion: — Shakespeare's
"Antony and Cleopatra ;" "Cleopatre" by Sardou.
(5)— Ruin of Mind, Health and Life:— "La Glu"
(Richepin, 1883) ; "L'Arlesienne" (Daudet and Bizet) ;
"La Furie" (Bois, 1909). From fiction (see C) : "Le
Possede" by Lemonnier. Passion Gratified at the Price
of Life: — "Une Nuit de Cleopatre"
(Gautier and
Masse).
(5) — Ruin of Fortunes, Lives and Honors: — "Nana" ;
in part "La Route d'Emeraude" (Richepin, after Demolder, 1909).

B— Temptations (see XII) Destroying the Sense of
Duty, of Pity, etc :— "Salome" (Oscar Wilde). From

fiction: "Herodias," and the attempts
"The Temptation of Saint Anthony."
77

(repulsed)

in

THIRTY-SIX

fa

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS"

-

(1) — Destruction of Honor, Fortune and Life,
by Erotic Vice: — "Germinie Lacerteux" by de Goncourt; "Rolande"
(Gramont, 1888) ; "Maman Colibri"
(Bataille, 1904).
From fiction: "La Cousine Bette";
"Le Capitaine Burle.'
(2)— The Same Effect Produced by Any Other Vice:
— "Trente Ans ou la Vie d'un Joueur" ; "L'Assommoir."
From fiction "L'Opium" by Bonnetain; "Lelie" by
Willy. In real life: our race-courses, our wine-shops,
In comedy :
"Un Ange"
our cafes, our clubs, etc.
(Capus, 1909)
Few situations, obviously, have received better and
more constant treatment during our own century — to
whose vices the Twenty-Second offers, in truth, a most
appropriate mirror, in its amalgam of gloom and erotic
ism, at the same time presenting the most interesting
studies ot nervous pathology.
C

TWENTY-THIRD SITUATION
NECESSITY OF SACRIFICING LOVED ONES
(The Hero ; the Beloved Victim
the Sacrifice)

;

the Necessity for

Although similar to the three situations we have
just considered, the Twenty-Third recalls, in one of its
aspects, that destruction of natural

affection which
marked the Thirteenth, "Hatred of Kinsmen." The feel
ings which we here encounter in the protagonist are,
it is true, of a nature altogether different. But through
the intrusion of the element of Necessity, the end
toward which he must proceed is precisely the same.
A (1) — Necessity for Sacrificing a Daughter in
the Public Interest: — "The Iphigenias" of Aeschylus
and of Sophocles; "Iphigenia in Aulis," by Euripides
and by Racine; "Erechtheus" by Euripides.
(2) — Duty of Sacrificing Her in Fulfillment of a Vow
to God: — The "Idomenees" of Crebillon, Lemierre, and
Cienf uegos ; the "Jephthes" of Buchanan and of Boyer.
This nuance tends at first toward Situation XVII, "Im
prudence," but the psychologic struggles soon give it
a very different turn.
(3) — Duty of Sacrificing Benefactors or Loved Ones
"Torquemada :" "Ninety-Three:"
Faith:
to Ones
"Les Mouettes" (Paul Adam, 1906) ; "La Fille a Guillotin" (Fleischmann, 1910) . Historic instances ; Philip
II ; Abraham and Isaac.
B (1) — Duty of Sacrificing Ones Child, Unknown
79

80

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

to Others, Under the Pressure of Necessity: — Euripi
des' "Melanippe"; "Lucrece Borgia," (II, 5).
(2) — Duty of Sacrificing, Under the Same Circum
stances, Ones Father: — The "Hypsipyles" of Aeschy
lus, and of Metastasio ; "The Lemnian Women" by
Sophocles.
(3) — Duty of Sacrificing, Under the Same Circum
stances, Ones Husband: — The "Danaides" of Phrynichus,, of Aeschylus, of Gombaud, of Salieri, of Spontini ;
the "Lynceus" of Theodectes and of Abeille ; the "Hypermnestres" of Metastasio, Riupeiroux, Lemierre, etc.
(4) — Duty of Sacrificing a Son-In-Law for the Public
Good:—"Un Patriote" (Dartois, 1881). For the Sake
of Reputation: — "Guibor" (a XIV Century Miracle of

Notre-Dame)

.

(5) — Duty of Contending with a Brother-In-Law for
the Public Good: — Corneille's "Horace," and that of

Aretin„ The loyalty and affection subsisting between
the adversaries remove all resemblance to the Thir
tieth.
(6) — Duty of Contending With a Friend: — "Jarnac"
(Hennique and Gravier, 1909) .
Nuance B, (B 1 for example), lends itself to a fine in
terlacing of motifs. Melanippe finds herself (1st)
forced to slay her son, an order which she would have
resisted at the risk of her own life, but she is at the
same time (2nd) obliged to conceal her interest in the
child, for fear of revealing his identity and thereby
causing his certain death. Similar dilemmas may be
evolved with equal success in all cases in which a char
acter receives an injunction which he is unwilling to
obey ; it will suffice to let him fall, by his refusal, into
a second situation leading to a result equally repugnant
This dilemma of action is
or, better yet, identical.
again found in what is called blackmail; we have also
seen its cruel alternatives outlined in Class D of Situa
tion XX ("Theodore," "The Virgin Martyr," etc.), and

TWENTY-THIRD

SITUATION

81

clearly manifested in Class D (especially D 2) of Sit
uation XXII ("Measure for Measure," "Le Huron,"
etc.) but it is ther j presented most crudely, by a single
character or event, of a nature tyrannical and odious.
Whereas in "Melanippe" it results so logically and piti
lessly from the action that it does not occur to us to
rebel against it ; we accept it without question, so nat
ural does it appear, so overwhelming.
Before leaving these four symmetrical situations, I
would suggest a way of disposing their elements with a
view to seeking states of mind and soul less familiar.
We have just seen these forces marshalled: — Passion
(vice, etc.) ; pure affection (for parents, friends, bene
factors, and particularly devotion to their honor, their
happiness, their interests) ; reasons of state (the suc
cess of a compatriot, of a cause, of a work) ; egoism
(will to live, cupidity, ambition, avarice, vanity) ;
honor (truthfulness, feminine chastity, promises to
God, filial piety).
Oppose these to each other, two By
two, and study and the ensuing conflicts.
The first cases produced will be those already cited.
Here follow other and newer ones: — a passion or vice
destroying interests of state (for in "Antony and
Cleopatra" it is only the royal pomp of the two lovers
which is impressive; one does not reflect upon the
peril of their peoples) ; egoism (in the form of ambi
tion, for example) struggling with faith in the soul of
man, a frequent case in religious wars ; egoism in this
ambitious guise overcoming natural affection (the
plotter denying or sacrificing his father, mother or
friend offers a fine study) ; a conflict between personal
honor and reasons of state (Judith in the arms of Holofernss; Bismarck falsifying the despatch of his mas
ter). Then oppose the various nuances to each other
(the hero torn between his faith and the honor of his
6

THIRTY-SIX

82

people, and so on).

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS
Subjects will spring up in myriads.

having
tragedy
(Special
notice— the neo-classic
—
fiction,
itsell dead, to psychological
proved
its
legatee)

.

TWENTY-FOURTH SITUATION
RIVALRY OF SUPERIOR AND INFERIOR
(The Superior Rival; the Inferior Rival; the Object)

I

would have preferred to make of this and the
The differ
following (Adultery) a single situation.
ence lies in a contract or a ceremony, of variable im
portance according to the milieu, and which in any case
change the dramatic emotions
does not materially
springing from the love contest; even this difference
becomes quite imperceptible in polygamous societies
(Hindu drama) . Thus I would rather have created but
one independent situation, of which the other should
be a nuance. . But I fear I should be accused of purpose
ly compressing modern works into the smallest pos
sible number of categories, for the two which we are
now to anaiyze contain the major part of them.
We have already remarked that between "Hatred of
Kinsmen" and "Rivalry of Kinsmen" the sole difference
lies in the fact that in the latter there is embodied in
human form the Object of dispute, the "casus belli."
For the same reason we may bring together the sit
uations "Rivalry of Superior and Inferior," "Adultery,"
and even "Murderous Adultery," and distinguish them
from all the situations which portray struggle pure
and simple,

(V, VII,

VIII, IX, X, XI, XXX, XXXI).

However, the beloved Object will more naturally
appear in the present cases of sentimental rivalry than
she could in the "Rivalry of Kinsmen," and nowhere
does a more favorable opportunity present itself to the
dramatic poet for portraying his ideals of love.
83

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

84

These cases are divided first according to sexes, then
according to the degrees of difference in the rank of
the rivals.
A — Masculine Rivalries, (1) — Of a Mortal and an Im
"Heaven
mortal: — "Mrigancalckha" by Viswanatha;
Of
and Earth" by Byron; "Polypheme"
(Samain).
—
Two Divinities of Unequal Power:
"Pandore" by Vol
taire.
(2) — Of a Magician and an Ordinary Man: — "Tanis
et Zelide," by Voltaire.
(3) — Of Conqueror and Conquered: — "Malati and
Madhava" by Bhavabuti ; "Le Tribut de Zamora"
(Gounod, 1881) ; "Le Sals" (Mme. Ollognier, 1881). Of
Victor and Vanquished: — Voltaire's "Alzire."
Of a
—
Master and a Banished Man: "Appius and Virginia"
by Webster; "Hernani" and "Mangeront-Ils ?" by
Hugo; "Dante" (Godard, 1890). Of Usurper and Sub
ject: — "Le Triumvirat" by Voltaire.
(4) — Of Suzerain King and Vassal Kings: — Corneille's "Attila."

King and a Noble:— "The Earthen ToyCart" by Sudraka; "The Mill" and "Nina de Plata" by

(5)— Of

a

Lope; "Agesilas and Surena" by Corneille; "Demet
rius" by Metastasio; "Le Fils de Porthos" (Blavet
1886).

(6) — Of

Powerful Person and an Upstart: — "Don
Sanche" by Corneille; "La Marjolaine" (Richepin fils,
1907).

a

(7)— Of Rich and Poor:— "La Question d' Argent"
by Dumas; "La Nuit de Saint-Jean"
(ErckmannChatrian and Lacome) ; "En Greve" (Hirsch, 1885) ;
"Surcouf" (Planquette, 1887) ; 'U Attentat" (Capus
and Descaves, 1906) "La Barricade" (Bourget, 1910) ;
"La Petite Milliardaire" (Dumay and Forest, 1905).
In fiction: part of "Toilers of tne Sea." Relative in

TWENTY-FOURTH
equality: "Mon Ami Teddy"

SITUATION

(Rivoire

and

85

Besnard,

1910).

(8) — Of an Honored Man and a Suspected One: —
"L'Obstacle" (Daudet, 1890) ; "Le Drapeau" (Moreau,
1879) ; "Devant l'Ennemi" (Charton, 1890) ; "Jack
Tempete"

(Elzear, 1882)

"La Bucheronne"

(C. Edmond, 1889) . In comedy : "Le Mariage de Mile. Boulemans" (Fonson and Wicheler, 1911).
(9)— Rivalry of Two Who Are Almost Equal:—
"Dhourtta Samagana," the rivals here being master
and disciple, as is also the case in "Mai'tres Chanteurs,"
but not in "Glatigny" (Mendes, 1906), nor in "Bohemos" (Zamacois, 1907).
(10) — Rivalry of Equals, One of Whom Has in the
Past Been Guilty of Adultery: — "Chevalerie Rustique"
(Verga, 1888).
(11)— Of a Man Who is Loved and One Who Has
Not the Right to Love: — "La Esmeralda."
Husbands of a
(12) — Of the Two Successive
Divorcee— "Le Dedale" (Hervieu, 1903). By multiply
ing the number of husbands good comic effects might
;

be secured.

B— Feminine Rivalries, (1) — Of

a Sorceress and an
de la Toison d'Or"

Ordinary Woman: — "La Conquete
by Corneille: "La Sorciere" (Sardou, 1903).
(2)— Of Victor and Prisoner :— "Le Comte d'Essex"
by Thomas Corneille; the "Marie Stuart" of Schiller
and also of Samson.
(3)— Of Queen and Sub ject .-—"Marie

Tudor" and
"Amy Robsart" by Hugo; "Le Cor Fleuri" (Mikhael

and Herold) ; "Varennes"
(Lenotre and Lavedan,
1904). The title of this sub-class is, it will be remem
"Twentybered, the only one cited of the so-called
might
indeed
Four Situations" of Gerard de Nerval ; we
include under this denomination the examples of B 1,
2 and 4. But at most it can constitute only a half of
one of the four classes of "Rivalry of Superior and

86

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Inferior," which itself has but the importance of one
situation in a series of thirty-six.
(4) — Of a Queen and a Slave: — "Bajazet" by Racine ;
"Zulime;" part of "Une Nuit de Cleopatre" (from
Gautier, by V. Masse, 1885).
(5)_Of Lady and Servant :— "The Gardener's Dog"
by Lope de Vega (wherein may be found what is per
haps the most successful of the many attempted
portraits of an amorous "grande dame").
(6) — Of a Lady and a Woman of Humbler Position:

— "Francois-les-bas-bleus"

(Messager, 1883) ; "Le Friquet" (Willy and Gyp, 1904) ; "Petite Hollande" (S

Guitry, 1908)

;

"L'Ane

de

Buridan" (de Fleurs and

de

Caillavet, 1909); "Trains de Luxe" (Hermant, 1909).
Of a Lady and Two Women of Humbler Class: — "Les
Passageres" (Coolus, 1906).
(7) — Rivalry of Two Who Are Almost Equals, Com
plicated by the Abandonment of One (this tends
toward A (1) of Situation XXV) :— Corneille's "Ariane;" "Benvenuto" (Diaz, 1890). In fiction: "La Joie

Vivre."
(8) — Rivalry Between a Memory or an Ideal (That
of a Superior Woman) and a Vassal of Her Own: —
de

"Semiramide Riconosciuta" by Metastasio; '"Madame
la Mort" by Rachilde (in which the field of struggle is
subjective) ; "La Morte" by Barlatier; "L'lmage" by
Beaubourg. Symmetrical case in the masculine: "The
Lady from the Sea," by Ibsen.
(9) — Rivalry of Mortal and Immortal: — "La Dame
a la Faulx" (Saint-Pol Roux) .
C — Double Rivalry (A loves B, who loves C, who
loves D) : — Metastasio's "Adrien;" Lessing's "Emilia
Galotti;" "La Fermiere" (d'Artois, 1889) ; "Ascanio"
(Saint-Saens, 1890) ; "Les Deux Hommes" (Capus,
1908) ; "Le Circuit" (Feydeau and de Croisset, 1909) ;
"L' Article 301" (Duval, 1909). It is permissible to
extend the rivalry to three, four, etc., which will make

TWENTY-FOURTH

SITUATION

87

it

less commonplace, but will not greatly vary the
effects, although sometimes the chain will end in a
complete circle (that is to say, D will love A), or a
partial one (D returning the love of C).
D — Oriental Rivalries: — We are beginning to take
account of the fact that the divorce law was obtained

chiefly through the efforts of our dramatic writers,
less because they were convinced of its righteousness
than because they felt the need of a renewal and in
crease of their limited combinations. They might, in
deed, have breathed a fresher and purer air by turn
ing toward Hindu polygamy!
Theophile
Goethe,
Gautier
(who foresaw the decadence of woman
through the extension and increase of vice), Maurice
Barres ("L'Ennemi des Lois")
seem to have felt
something of the sort. We could wish that the mis
understandings of the modern home, in which archaic
fidelity and genuine monogamy have almost ceased to
exist, on one side especially, might be settled with a
modicum of this spirit of tolerance.
(1) — Rivalry of Two Immortals: — "The Loves of

Krishna" by Roupa.
(2) — Of Two Mortals: — "Agnimitra and Malavika,"
by Kalidasa.

(3)— Of Two Lawful Wives:— "The Necklace,"

by

Sri Harshadeva; "The Statue" by Rajasekhara.
To the relative rank of the two rivals there is added,
as a means of varying the theme, the position, with
respect to them, of the beloved Object. The aspects
of the struggle will depend, in fact, upon how near the
prize may be to one of the adversaries, or how distant ;
upon whether the Object be of a rank inferior to both
rivals, or midway between the two, or even superior
to both.

TWENTY-FIFTH SITUATION
ADULTERY
(A

Deceived Husband or Wife

;

Two Adulterers)

Without deserving to constitute a situation of itself
alone, Adultery yet presents an interesting aspect of
Theft (action from without) combined with Treason
Schiller, following the example of
(action within).

Lope, was pleased to idealize brigandage ; Hugo and the
elder Dumas undertook for adultery a similar paradox ;
and, developing the process of antithesis by which were
created "Triboulet" and "Lucrece Borgia," they suc
ceeded, once for all — and quite legitimately. The folly
lies in the belief of the unthinking crowd in the ex
cellence of the subject thus presented; in the public's
admiration for the "Antonys" — but the public has
ended by preferring the moving pictures to them.
First Case : — The author portrays the Adulterer, the
stranger in the house, as much more agreeable, hand
somer, more loving, bolder or stronger than the de
.
.
ceived husband
.
Whatever arabesques may
cover the simple and fundamental fact of Larceny,
whatever complaisance may be shown by a tired public,
there remains nevertheless, beneath it all, a basis of
granite — the old-fashioned conscience; to it, the thing
which is here vaunted is simply the breach of the Word
of Honor of a contract — that word, that promise which
was obeyed by the Homeric gods and by the knights
of Chivalry no less than by ourselves; that base of
every social agglomeration; that which savages and
88

TWENTY-FIFTH SITUATION

89

which convicts respect between themselves; that pri
mary source of order in the world of action and of
thought. The spectators' attention may of course be
momentarily turned from a point of view so strict,
and quite naturally; through the heresies of the im
agination almost anything may evoke a laugh. Do we
not laugh heartily at the sight of a fat man tumbling
ridiculously down a flight of steps, at the bottom of
which he may break his neck? Anything, likewise,
may evoke our pity; we have pity for the perjuries of
the gambler and the drunkard, but it is mingled with
Now, is it this sort of sad contempt which
contempt.
our dramatists wish to claim for their attractive young
adulterers, as the reward of so much care and effort?
If not, the effort has been a mistaken one.
Second Case: — The Adulterer is represented as less
attractive and sympathetic than the unappreciated
This forms the sort of play known as
husband.
"wholesome," which as a matter of fact is merely tire
some. A man whose pocket-book has been stolen does
not on that account grow greater in our eyes, and when
the information which he is in a position to furnish us
is once obtained, our attention is turned from him and
directed toward the thief. But if the latter, already
far from heroic in his exploit, is in turn portrayed as
still less interesting than his dupe, he merely disgusts
us — and the adulterous wife appears but a fool to have
preferred him. Then (with that childishness which
most of us retain beneath our sophistication) , scenting
a foregone conclusion in the lesson which the author
intends for us, and suspecting falsehood at the bottom
of it, we grimace with irritation, disappointed to per
ceive, behind the story presented for our entertain
ment, the vinegarish smile of the school-teacher.
Third Case: —The deceived Husband or Wife is
Avenged. Here, at last, something happens ! But this

90

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

vengeance, unfortunately, is merely one of the cases
of the Third Situation.
Thus we shall not succeed with our Twenty-fifth
Situation except by treating it in a broadly human
spirit, without dolefulness and without austerity. It
will not be necessary to defend the thief nor the
traitor, nor to take the part of their dupe. To com
prehend them all, to have compassion upon all, to ex
plain them all— which is to say to comprehend one
self, to have pity upon oneself, and to explain oneself —
this is the real work to be accomplished.
A — A Mistress Betrayed; (1) — For a Young Wom
an: — Sophocles' "Women of Colchis"; the "Medeas" of
Seneca and of Corneille ; "Miss Sara Sampson" by Lessing; "Lucienne" (Gramont, 1890).
These examples
are, because of the final vengeance, symmetrical to the

masculine of Class B.
(2) — For a Young Wife (the marriage preceding the
opening of the play) : — "Un Voyage de Noces" (Tiercelin, 1881).

(3)—For a Girl:— "La Veine" (Capus, 1901).
(B)— A Wife Betrayed: (1)— For a Slave, Who
Does Not Love in Return: — "Maidens of Trachis" by

Sophocles; "Hercules on CEta" by Seneca (the first
part; as to the rest, see "Imprudence") ; the "Andro
mache" of Euripides and that of Racine (in which this
is one side of the drama; for the other, see "Sacrifices

for Kinsmen").
(2) — For Debauchery: — "Numa Roumestan" by
Daudet; "Francillon" by Dumas; "Serge Panine" by

Ohnet; the opening part of "Meres Ennemies," which
afterward turns to "Hatred of Kinsmen."
(3) — For a Married Woman (a double adultery) : —
"La Princesse Georges" and "L'Etrangere" by Dumas ;
"Monsieur de Morat" (Tarbe, 1887) ; "Les Menages do

TWENTY-FIFTH SITUATION
Paris" (Raymond, 1886)
mai'tre)

;

"Le Depute Leveau"

91

(Le-

.

(4) —With the Intention of Bigamy:— The "Almaeons of Sophocles and of Euripides.
(5) — For a Young Girl, Who Does Not Love in Re
turn: — Shakespeare's "Henry VIII," and that of SaintSaens; Alfieri's "Rosamonde" (a combination of the
present and the preceding situations, for it is also a
simple Rivalry of King and Subject).
(6) — A Wife Envied by a Young Girl Who is in Love
With Her Husband :— "Stella" by Goethe; "Dernier
Amour" (Ohnet, 1890).
(7) — By a Courtesan: — "Miss Fanfare" (Ganderax,
(Vacquerie and Saint1881, see B 2) ; "Proserpine"
Saens, 1887) ; "La Comtesse Fredegonde" (Amigues,
1887); "Myrane" (Bergeat, 1890).
(8) — Rivalry Between a Lawful Wife Who is Anti
pathetic and a Mistress Who is Congenial: —"C'est la
Loi" (Cliquet, 1882) ; "Les Affranchis" (Madame Leneru, 1911).

(9) — Between a Generous Wife and an Impassioned
Girl:^-"La Vierge Folle" (Bataille, 1910) ; "La Femme

Demain" (Arthur Lefebvre, 1909) .
C
(1) — An Antagonistic Husband Sacrificed for a
Congenial Lover: — "Angelo;" "Le Nouveau Monde" by
Villiers de l'Isle Adam; "Un Drole" (Yves Guyot,
1889) ; "Le Mari" (Nus and Arnould, 1889) ; "Les Tenailles" (Hervieu) ; "Le Torrent" (Donnay) ; "Decad
ence" (Guinon, 1901) ; "Page Blanche" (Devore, 1909).
(2) — A Husband, Believed to be Lost, Forgotten for
a Rival: — "Rhadamiste
et Zenobie" by Crebillon;
"Jacques
by Zola.
Damour"
The "Zenobie" of
Metastasio, by the faithful love retained for her
husband, forms a case unique ( !) among the innumer
able dramas upon adulterous passions.
Compare "Le
Dedale" (see XXIV, A 12).
Husband Sacrificed for a
(3) — A Commonplace
de

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

92

Sympathetic Lover: — "Diane de Lys" by Dumas;
"Tristan and Isolde" by Wagner (with the addition of
"Madness," produced by a love-potion) ; "Franchise de
Rimini" (A. Thomas, 1882) ; "La Serenade" (Jean Jullien, 1887) ; "L'Age Critique" (Byl, 1890) ; "Antoinette
Sabrier" (Coolus, 1903) ; "La Montansier" (Jeofrin, de
Flers and de Caillavet, 1904) ; "Connais-toi" (Hervieu,
"Sigurd"
adultery:
1909). The same case without
(Reyer, 1885) ; "La Comtesse Sarah" (1886).
(4) — A Good Husband Betrayed for an Inferior
Rival:— "L'Aveu" (Sarah Bernhard, 1888) ; "Revoltee"
(Lemaitre, 1889) ; "La Maison des Deux Barbeaux"
(Theuriet, 1885) ; "Andre del Sarte" (Alfred de Musset) ; "La Petite Paroisse" (Daudet, 1911) ; "Le Man
nequin d'Osier"
(France, 1904) ; "La Rencontre"
(Berton, 1909). Cases of preference without adultery:
"Smilis" by Aicard; "Les Jacobines" by Hermant
(1907).
(5)— For a Grotesque Rival:— "The Fatal Dowry"
by Massinger.
(6)— For an Odious Rival :— "Gerfaut" (from C. de
Bernard, by Moreau, 1886) ; "Cceur a Cceur" (Coolus,
1907).
(7) — For a Commonplace

Rival, By a Perverse
Claude" by Dumas; "PotBouille" by Zola; "Rivoli" (Fauchois. 1911): "Les
1904);
(Porto-Riche,
"Soeurette"
Malefflatre"
(Borteau-Loti). In fiction: "Madame Bovary."
(8) — For a Rival Less Handsome, but Useful (with
comic false suspicions; that is, suspicions afterward
'
thought to have been false) : — "L'Echeance"
(Jean
Wife: — "La Femme

de

Jullien, 1889).

(1) — Vengeance of a Deceived Husband (dramas
built upon a crescendo of suspicion) : — "The Physician
of His Own Honor" and "Secret Vengeance for Secret
Outrage" by Calderon; "L' Affaire Clemenceau"
by
D

Dumas

;

"The Kreutzer Sonata" (after Tolstoi, 1910)

;

TWENTY-FIFTH SITUATION

"La

Legende

(Donnay,

du Cceur"

1906)

;

(Aicard,

"Les Miroirs"

93

"Paraitre"
(Roinarrd) ; "The

1903)

;

Enigma" by Hervieu (which borrows something from
Situation

XI

of this name.

A

vengeance purely moral

:

"Apres Moi" (Bernstein, 1911); financial: "Samson,"

by the same author, (1907).

(2) — Jealousy Sacrificed for the Sake of a Cause:
(tending toward "Sacrifices for an Ideal") : — "Les
Jacobites" (Coppee, 1885) ; "Patrie" (Paladilhe, 1886).

Sacrificed out of Pity: — "La Famille d'Armelles''
(Marras, 1883).
E— A Husband Persecuted by a Rejected Rival:—
"Raoul de Crequi" (Delayrac, 1889).
This case is
symmetrical to B 7, and both proceed in the direction
of "Murderous Adultery."

TWENTY-SIXTH SITUATION
CRIMES OF LOVE
(The Lover; the Beloved)

This is the only tragic situation of all those built

upon Love, that subject being one essentially belonging
to comedy (see XXVIII and XXIX).
Eight species of erotic crimes may be pointed out : —
First: Onanism, that "solitary vice" which does not
lead to action, can furnish only melancholy silhouettes
such as the legend of Narcissus and "Chariot s'amuse,"
or certain grotesqueries of Aristophanes," unless it be
made the basis for a study of the weakening and col
lapse of the Will, in which case it might be grouped
with drunkenness, gambling, etc., in Situation XXIL
Violation, like murder, is but an act,
Second:
generally a brief one and not a situation; at most it
Even the consequences to
approaches "Abduction."
the perpetrator, like those of the
Thii d : Prostitution and its succeedant gallantry and
Juanism (repetition of acts), do not become dramatic
unless pursued by punishment, in which case they
belong to the Fifth Situation. Nevertheless, if impun
ity be secured, the taste for violation and for prostitu

tion tends toward the Twenty-Second.
Fourth: Adultery, whose character of theft has
given rise to special situations already studied.
Fifth: Incest is divided in two principal directions.
It may be committed in an ascendant-descendant line,
in which case it implies either filial impiety or an abuse
of authority analogous to that which we shall find in
94

TWENTY-SIXTH

SITUATION

96

the Eighth variety of criminal love. It may also occurupon what may be called a horizontal line; that is,
between consanguines or persons related by marriage.
A (1)— A Mother in Love With Her Son:— "Semiramis" by Manfredi, and by Crebillon; to explain and
extenuate this case, the latter author has first used
the Eighteenth (Involuntary Crimes of Love) ; "Les
Cuirs de Boeuf" (Polti, 1898). Inverse case: "Le
Petit Ami" by Leautaud.
(2) — A Daughter in Love With Her Father: —
Alfieri's "Myrrha," whose psychology is drawn from
that of "Phedre."
(3)— Violation of a Daughter by a Father:— "The
Cenci" by Shelley ; the story of the Peau d'ane (inten
tion only).
B (1)— A Woman Enamored of Her Stepson: —
"Iobates" and "Phaedra" by Sophocles; the Hippolytus" of Euripides and of Seneca; "Phedre" by Racine.
In comedy: "Madame i'Amirale" (Mars and Lyon,
In almost none of the foregoing cases, it will
1911).
be observed, is there a reciprocity of desire, whereas
the passion, heretofore solitary, is shared, and the
crime, unconscious at least on one side in "Myrrha,"
is boldly committed in
(2) — A Woman and Her Stepson Enamored of Each
Other: — Zola's "Renee"
(drawn from his story
"Curee,") and similar to the quasi-incestuous passion of
"Dr. Pascal." The love is platonic in Alfieri's "Philip
II," and Schiller's "Don Carlos."
(3) — A Woman Being the Mistress, at the Same
Time, of a Father and Son, Both of Whom Accept the
Situation:— "L'Ecole des Veufs" (Ancey, 1889).
C
(1) — A Man Becomes the Lover of His Sister-inLaw:—"La Sang-Brule" (Bouvier, 1885) ; "Le Con
The Man Alone
science de l'Enfant" (Devore, 1889).

96

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Enamored: — "Le Sculpteur de Masques" (Cromelynck.
1911).

(2) — A Brother and Sister in Love With Each
Other: — Euripides "iEolus"; "Canace" by Speroni;
"Tis Pity She's a Whore," Ford's masterpiece; "La
Citta Morta" by d'Annunzio.
Even after these works, there remains much more
than a gleaning; an ample harvest is still before us.
We may extend Class A to include the complicity of
both parties (Nero and Agrippina furnish an example,
according to Suetonius) ; a similar example, although
fragmentary, exists for A 2, in the beginning of Shake
B 1 may be reversed, the step
speare's "Pericles."
son's passion being unrequited by his father's wife, a
case which is certainly not uncommon.
We may also
suppress the complicity in B 3, in C I, and in C 2, allow
ing the infatuation to subsist upon one side only,
Without going so far as the criminal act, a study of
mere temptations or desires, well or ill controlled, has
furnished
subtile chapters in the psychologies of
Century
grandes dames,
as
Seventeenth
such
Victor Cousin took delight in.
Finally, we may interlace the threads of each of
these species of incest with one of the seven other
classes of Crimes of Love ; under the form of ignorance,
the fifth and sixth classes are mingled in one of the
episodes of "Daphnis and Chloe."
Add the usual in
cidental rivalries, adulteries, murders, etc.
Sixth : Homosexuality in its two senses, the branches
of pederasty and tribadism:
D (1) — A Man Enamored of Another Man, Who
Yields: — Example from fiction: "Vautrin." Dramatic
examples : the "Laius" of Aeschylus ; the "Chrysippus"
of Euripides.
The latter tragedy appears to have been
one of the finest, and perhaps the most moving, of all
antiquity.
Three situations were there superposed
with rare success. Laius having conceived a passion,

TWENTY-SIXTH

SITUATION

97

unnatural and furthermore adulterous, for the young
Chrysippus, an epithalamium as terrible as that of
Ford must have resulted, for here appeared and spoke
the first man who had ever experienced such desires
and dared to express and gratify them, and in his
words lay the explanation of the wavering and fall of
Chrysippus.
Then followed the most indignant and
pitiless jealousy on the part of Jocaste, wife of Laius.
Against Chrysippus she roused the old envy of the
young man's two brothers, an envy of the same type
as that which armed the sons of Jacob against Joseph,
but an envy which shows itself strangely menacing at
the mere announcement of the names of these two
brotners, — Atreus and Thyestes ! The fratricide is ac
complished, to the fierce joy of the queen; Laius learns
the details from the lips of the dying Chrysippus him
And, in some prediction — doubtless that of
self.
Tiresias, young at the time and not yet deprived of
sight — there dawns the destiny of the two great
families of tragedy par excellence, the Labdacides
and the Atrides, beginning in these crimes and running
through all Greek legend.
The tribadic or sapphic branch has not been used
upon the stage ; Mourey alone has attempted it, but in
vain in his "Lawn Tennis." The objection which might
be urged against it (and which probably explains why
the drama, in the ages of its liberty, has made no use
of it) is that this vice has not the horrible grandeur
of its congener.
Weak and colorless, the last evil habit
of worn-out or unattractive women, it does not offer to
the tragic poet that madness, brutal and preposterous,
but springing from wild youth and strength, which we
find in the criminal passion of the heroic ages.
Seventh: Bestiality, or passion for a creature out
side the human species. Classed in general as a vice,
it is of no use theatrically. Nevertheless, in
E—A Woman Enamored of a Bull;— "The Cretans"

98

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

of Euripides seems to have revealed the emotions, after
all conceivable, of this "Ultima Thule" of sexual per
version. Better than anywhere else, evidently, the
illogical and mysterious character of the life of the
senses, the perversion of a normal instinct, and the
feeling of fatalism which its victims communicate,
could here be presented in sad and awful nudity.
Eighth : The Abuse of Minor Children borrows some
thing from each of the seven preceding varieties. That
such a subject — so modern, so English — may in skilful
hands become most pathetic, is readily apparent to
those of us who read, a few years ago, the "Pall Mall

Gazette."

TWENTY-SEVENTH SITUATION
DISCOVERY OF THE DISHONOR OF A LOVED ONE
(The Discoverer

;

the Guilty One)

From this Situation there results, almost immediate
ly, a psychologic struggle similar to that of the
Twenty-Third, "Sacrifice of Loved Ones," but with
out the attraction of a high Ideal; this is replaced, in
the present action, by the lash of shame.
A (1) — Discovery of a Mother's Shame:—
Augier;
and
"Madame Caverlet"
"Odette"
by
"Georgette" by Sardou; "Madame X" (Bisson, 1908) ;
"Mrs. Warren's Profession" (Bernard Shaw) ; "Les
Quarts d'Heure" (second part; Guiches and Lavedan,
This sad destruction of a child's deepest re
1888).
spect and reverence is colored, in these works, by the
terrors of the mother, by her blushes, by her remorse
before the consequences of the past ; through this last
point the action ends in the Thirty-Fourth (Remorse).
It remains unconnected in the second part of the
"Marquis de Priola" (Lavedan, 1901).
(2) — Discovery of a Father's Shame: — "Vieille Histoire" (Jean Jullien, 1891) ; the denouement of "Pierre
et Therese" (Prevost, 1909).
(3) — Discovery of a Daughter's Dishonor: — Part of
"La Fille du Depute" (Morel, 1881) ; of "Les Affaires
sont les Affaires" (Mirbeau, 1902) ; "L'Oreille Fendue
(Nepoty, 1908).
B (1) — Discovery of a Dishonor in the Family of
Ones Fiancee:— "L'Absente" (Villemer, 1889).
Re
tragedy
of
whose
mild
romance,
finements
consists in
99

100

THIRTY-SIX

DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

retarding the signature of a contract, and which cor
responds also to the pseudo-Situation XXX (Forbid
Something of their dullness has already
den Loves).
emanated from A 1 and A 2.
(2) — Discovery that Ones Wife Has Been Violated
Before Marriage: — "Le Secret de Gilberte" (Massiac,
Since the Marriage: — "Flore de Frileuse" by
1890).
Bergerat, with comic denouement thanks to a "quidpro-quo."
(3) — That She Has Previously Committed a Fault:
— "Le Prince Zilah" (Claretie, 1885) ; part of Dumas'
through
Marriages
"Denise."
Common instances:
agencies.

(4) — Discovery that Ones Wife Has Formerly Been
a Prostitute: — "Lena" (Berton and Mme. van Velde,
1886)! That ones mistress has been a prostitute: —
"Marion Delorme." The same situation, from the

point of view of "Remorse" (XXXIV), is encountered
,. ,
in Zola's "Madeleine."
—
(5) -Discovery of Dishonor on the Part of a Lover
(this also borders upon XXXIV:— "Chamillac" (Feuillet, 1886) ; "Le Crocodile" (Sardou, 1886).
formerly a
(6) — Discovery that Ones Mistress,
Prostitute, Has Returned to Her Old Life (with extenu
ating circumstances) : — "La Dame
aux Camellias
"La
(Arnyvelde,
;
Courtisane"
Dumas)
1905) ; part of.
"Manon Lescaut."
But for feminine cunning, would
not this be the normal course of all "bonnes fortunes ?"
(7) — Discovery that Ones Lover is a Scoundrel, or
that Ones Mistress is a Woman of Bad Character: —
"Monsieur Alphonse" by Dumas ; "Mensonges" by
Emile Michelet. Since (as Palice remarks) liaisons
would last forever if they were never broken off, and
since the two lovers, who certainly know each other
well, always give as the reason of their rupture the
title of the present sub-class, the conclusion is as easy
to draw as it is unflattering to the human species. The

TWENTY-SEVENTH SITUATION

101

Same Discovery Concerning a So-Called King: — "Sire"
(Lavedan, 1909).
(8) — The Same Discovery Concerning Ones Wife: —

"Le Mariage d'Olympe" by Augier.
C —Discovery that Ones Son is an Assassin:—
"Werner" by Byron; "La Policiere" (Montepin, 1889).

The surprise is intensified in cases of parricide. Nuance
C is capable of infinite development.
D — Might constitute a distinct situation; there is
not only the discovery, but the duty of imposing pun
ishment as well. This situation might serve as an in
termediary between the Twenty-Third, "Duty of Sac
rificing Kinsmen," and the Twenty-Seventh, which we
are now studying, and which would thus end with
Class C.
(1) — Duty of Punishing a Son Who is a Traitor to
Country:— The "Brutus" of Voltaire, and of Alfieri.
A Brother Who is a Traitor to His Party: — "Etudiants
Russes" by Gilkin.
(2) — Duty of Punishing a Son Condemned Under a
Law Which the Father has Made: — "L'Inflexible"
(Parodi, 1884) ; "Le Tribun" (Bourget, 1910) ; "L'Apotre" (Loyson, 1911).
(3) — Duty of Punishing a Son Believed to be Guilty:
— "Le Regiment" (Mary, 1890); "L'As de Trefle"
(Decourcelle,

1883)

.

This approaches

Error) .
(4) — Duty of Sacrificing,

XXXIII (Judicial

to Fulfill a Vow of Tyran

nicide, a Father Until then Unknown.
This impru
dent vow carries us back, at one point, to the Seven
teenth (Imprudence), and at another point the striking
of an unknown parent recalls also the Nineteenth. —
"Severo Torelli (Coppee, 1883).
(5) — Duty of Punishing a Brother Who is an
(Marot, 1881).
Assassin: — "Casse-Museau"
From

102

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

this situation the kinsman-judge escapes for a mo
ment, only to fall into D 3, from which he returns
with resignation to D 5.
(6) — Duty of Punishing Ones Mother to Avenge
Ones Father: — (Situation IV arrested prematurely) :
— "Le Cceur de Se-hor (Michaud d'Humiac).
The
Fourth is less in evidence in "Simone" (Brieux, 1908).

TWENTY-EIGHTH SITUATION
OBSTACLES TO LOVE
(Two Lovers; an Obstacle)

(1) — Marriage Prevented by Inequality of
Rank:— "Nitetis" and "The Chinese Hero" by Metastasio ; "Le Prince Soleil" (Vasseur, 1889) ; second act
of "La Vie Publique'' (Fabre, 1901) ; "Ramuntcho"
(Pierre Loti, 1908) ; "L'Emigre" (Bourget, 1908). This

A

is the sentimental-philosophical Situation of a great
number of eighteenth century works ("Nanine," etc.),
in which a lord invariably falls in love with a peasant
girl. In George Sand, on the contrary, it is always a
lady who is in love with a man of inferior rank ; a sort
of literature which at least has inspired many gallant
adventures of our own time. The addition of one more
little obstacle — the marriage bond — furnishes the pre
text for the real intrigue of "Ruy Bias."
(2) — Inequality of Fortune an Impediment to Mar
riage: — "Myrtille" and in part "Friend Fritz" by Erckmann-Chatrian ; "L'Abbe Constantin" by Halevy; "La
Petite Amie" (Brieux, 1902) ; "La Plus Faible" (Prevost, 1904) ; "La Veuve Joyeuse" (Meilhac, Leon and
Stein, 1909) ; "Le Danseur Inconnu" (Bernard, 1909) ;
"La Petite Chocolatiere" (Gavault, 1909) ; "Primerose";
"Le Reve" (from Zola's story by Bruneau) ; in fiction;
"Le Bonheur des Dames" — to mention only the more
estimable works, leaving aside the endless number of
trivial plays imitative of Scribe, and the Romances of
Poor "Young Men, Dames Blanches, etc., which make
103

104

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

our ears ring with confusing additions and subtrac
tions, until the unexpected final multiplication — "deus
ex machina" — which suddenly equalizes the two terms
of the problem, the two fortunes of the lovers, with
the most admirably symmetrical alignment of parallel
zeros — preceded, oh joy ! oh bliss ! on one side as on the
other, by two identical figures !
It must of course be recognized that these social
and conventional inequalities are mere puerile details,
and that the lovers, if they have but a little courage
and sincerity, will overcome them without difficulty;
they can do so by simply leaving behind them titles and
money, and in a new country, under other names,
bravely beginning life again together. If, instead of
shown
such bagatelles, we might only be sometimes
the more serious obstacles of inequality of ages, of
characters, of tastes — which are at the same time so
much more common;
They are, indeed, so frequent that a general theory
might be established with regard to them. The first
love (twenty years) seeks in its object equality of
rank and superiority of age (this is a fact well known
to those who have studied the cases of girl-mothers) ;
the second love, and in general the second period of
emotional life (thirty years), addresses itself, audacity
having been acquired, to superiors in rank but equals
in age ; finally, the third love, or in a more general way
the third epoch of sentimental life, inclines by prefer
ence to those who are younger anl socially inferior.
Naturally, subdivision is here possible.
B —Marriage Prevented by Enemies and Contingent
1883);
Obstacles:— "Sieba" (Manzotti,
"Et MaSoeur?" (Rabier, 1911) ; "Le Peche de Marthe" (Rochard, 1910) ; all fairy-plays, since the "Zeim" of Gozzi.
In fine, a sort of steeple-chase process adapts itself to
this situation, but the chase is not one in which several
rival steeds and riders engage; throughout its course

TWENTY-EIGHTH

SITUATION

105

but a single couple enters upon it, to end at the shin
ing goal with the usual somersault.
C
(1) — Marriage Forbidden on Account of the
Young Woman's Previous Betrothal to Another: — "II
Re Pastore" by Metastasio ; and other pieces without
The lovers will die if separated,
so they
number.
assure us. We see them make no preparations to do
so, but the spectator is good enough to take their word
for it ; the ardors, the "braises'^tp use the exact
siecle" — and other nervous
language of the "grand
phenomena in hypochondriacs of this sort cannot but
offer some interest — not, however, for long.
(2) — The Same Case, Complicated by an Imaginary
Marriage of the Beloved
Object: — "Les Bleus de
1' Amour" (Coolus, 1911).
D (1) — A Free Union Impeded by the Opposition
of Relatives:— "Le Divorce" (Bourget, 1908) ; "Les
Lys" (Wolf and Leroux, 1908).
(2) — Family Affection Disturbed by the Parents-inLaw:— "Le Roman d'Elise" (Richard, 1885) ; "Le Poussin" (Guiraud, 1908).
E — By the Incompatibility of Temper of the Lovers*
— "Montmartre" (Frondaie, 1911). "Les Angles du
Divorce" (Biollay) belongs both to E and to D 2.
F— Love — but enough of this ! What are we doing, cospectators in this hall, before this pretended situation ?
Upon the stage are our two young people, locked in
close embraces or conventionally attitudinizing in pure
ly theatrical poses. What is there in all this worth
Let us leave it . . , What,
remaining for ?
Madame, you straighten yourself in your ehair and
crane your neck in excitement over the gesticulations
of the "jeune premier?" But his sweetheart there be
side him — have you forgotten that it is she whom he
desires, or are the two of them playing so badly, is
their dialogue so little natural that you forget the
story enacted and fondly imagine yourself listening tQ

106

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

to you alone ?
a monologue, a declaration addressed
open,
eyes starting
there,
with
mouth
And Monsieur
from his head, following with avidity every movement
of the actress's lithe figure ! Quick, my good man,
another will be before you! Be consistent, at least!
Spring upon the stage, break the insipid dandy's bones,
and take his place !

Sorry return to promiscuity, in our overheated halls
like lupanars, which the clergy is not altogether un
reasonable in condemning! Do people gather here
simply to study amatory manifestations ? In that case,
why not freely open training schools for courtesans ? Is
it for the benefit of the sidewalk traffic, later in the
evening, that the public is here being prepared?
O fresh and stormy winds of Dionysian drama!
Aeschylus, where art thou who wouldst have blushed
to represent aught of amorous passion but its crimes
Do we not, even yet, perceive
the
and
infamies?
heights to which rise those chaste pinnacles of modern
art, "Macbeth" and "Athalie?"
But why disturb ourselves ? Turning our eyes from
these summits to the scene before us, we do not feel
depression ; indeed, we indulge in a hearty laugh. These
characters here before us ? Why, they are but puppets
of comedy, nothing more. And the effort of their mis
guided authors to make them serious and tragic de
spite their nature has resulted in mere caricature. In
more intelligent hands, have not the best of our
dramas wherein love is important (but not of the first
importance, as in this XXVIII) returned logically and
naturally to an indulgence of smiles ? "Le Cid," which
is the classic type of this sort, is a tragi-comedy, and
all the characters surrounding Romeo and Juliet
are frankly comic.

Nevertheless, our blind dramaturgy, with continued
obstinacy, still breathes forth its solemnities in this

TWENTY-EIGHTH SITUATION

107

equivocal rhythm.
Whether the piece treats of sociol
ogy, of politics, of religion, of questions of art, of the
title to a succession, of the exploitation of mines, of
the invention of a gun, of the discovery of a chemical
product, of it matters not what — a love story it must
have; there is no escape.
Savants, revolutionists,
poets, priests or generals present themselves to us only
to fall immediately to love-making or match-making,
It becomes a mania. And we are asked to take these

tiresome repetitions seriously!
This, then, is the actual stage of today. In my opin
ion, de Chirac alone has shown himself its courageously
logical son — although a rejected one, — society, like an
aged coquette, reserving always some secret sins, and
fearing nothing so much as nudity, which would
destroy the legend of her imaginary wicked charms,
veiled, she willingly lets it be supposed, under her
hypocrisy.
How grotesque an aspect will our ithyphallic obses
sion present, once it is crystallized in history, when
we shall finally have returned
to antique common
sense

!

V

TWENTY-NINTH SITUATION
AN ENEMY LOVED
(The Beloved Enemy

;

the Lover

;

the Hater)

A— The Loved

One Hated by Kinsmen of the Lover.
The preceding Situation might very well be absorbed
into this*
(1) — The Lover Pursued by the Brothers of His Be

loved:—"The Duchess of Main"
Broken Heart" by Ford.

by

Webster;

"The

(2)—The Lover Hated by the Family of his Be
loved : — "The Story of Yayati" by Roudradeva (with
the characteristic
color of these Hindu rivalries,

wherein jealousy is hardly perceptible) ; "The Victory
of Pradyoumna" by Samara Dikchita; Metastasio's
"Cato"; "La Grande Marniere" (Ohnet, 1888).
(3)— The Lover is the Son of a Man Hated by the
Kinsmen of His Beloved: — "La Taverne des Trabans"
and "Les Rantzau" by Erckmann-Chatrian.
In comic
vein: "Dieu ou pas Dieu." a romance by Beaubourg.
(4) — The Beloved is an Enemy of the Party of the
Woman Who Loves Him: — "Madhouranirouddha" by
Vira, the contemporary of Corneille ; "Les Scythes" by
Voltaire; "Almanzor" by Heine;; "Lakme" by Delibes;
"Les Carbonari" (No, 1882) ; "Madame Therese" by
Erckmann-Chatrian ; "Lydie" (Miral, 1882) ; "Les Amazones"
(Mazel) ; "Les Oberle" (Bazin, 1905) ; Les
Noces Corinthiennes" (France) ; "l'Exode" (Fauchois,
1904).

B (1)— The Lover is the Slayer of the Father of
His Beloved: — "Le Cid" (and the opera drawn from
it) ; "Olympie" by Voltaire.
108

TWENTY-NINTH

SITUATION

109

(2)— The Beloved is the Slayer of the Father of her
Lover: — "Mademoiselle de Bressier" (Delpit, 1887).
(3)— The

Beloved

is the Slayer of the Brother of

Her Lover: — "La Reine Fiammette"
(4)— The Beloved is the Slayer of

(Mendes,

1889).

the Husband of
Him,
But Who Has Previously
the Woman Who Loves
Sworn to Avenge that Husband: — "Irene" by Voltaire.
(5) — The Same Case, Except that a Lover, Instead
of a Husband, Has Been Slain: — "Fedora" (Sardou,
1882).

— The

Beloved is the Slayer of a Kinsman of the
Woman Who Loves Him: — "Romeo and Juliet," this
by that of "Abduction"
situation being modified
then,
(elopement),
with triple effect by XXXVI, "Loss
of Loved Ones;" the first time mistakenly, the second
time simply and actually, the third time doubly and
simultaneously to both the families of the principal
characters ; "PAncetre" (Saint-Saens and Lassus) :
"Fortune and Misfortune of a Name" and "His Own
Gaoler" by Calderon.
(7) — The Beloved is the Daughter of the Slayer of
Her Lover's Father: — "Le Crime de Jean Morel"
(Samson, 1890) ; "La Marchande de Sourires" (Judith
Gautier, 1888).
The chief emotional element thus remains the same
as in the Fifth (Pursuit) , and Love here serves espec
ially to present the pursued man under various fav
orable lights which have a certain unity.
She whom
he loves here plays, to some small extent, the role of
Suppress the love interest, replace
the Greek chorus.
it with any other tie, however weak, or even leave
nothing in its place, and a play of the type of Situation
V, with all its terrors, will still remain. Attempt, on
the contrary, to curtail the other interest, the enmity
— to soften the vengeance — and to substitute any other
(6)

ilO

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

element of difference or leave their place unfilled, and

what will remain of tragic emotion? Nothing.
We have, then, reason to conclude that love — an ex
cellent motif for comedy, better still for farce — sweet
or poignant as it may be in stories read in solitude,
of which we can fancy ourselves hero or heroine, love
is not, in reality, tragic, despite the virtuosity which
has sometimes succeeded in making it appear so, and
despite the prevalent opinion of this age of erotomania,
which is now approaching its end.

THIRTIETH SITUATION
AMBITION
(An Ambitious Person;

a

Thing Coveted; an

Adversary)

A highly intellectual type of action is

here presented,
for which there is no antique model, and from which
mediocrity usually keeps a respectful distance.
A — Ambition Watched and Guarded Against by a
Kinsman or a Patriot Friend: (1) — By a Brother: —
"Timoleon" by Alfieri. Historic instance (comic, that
is to say, feigned) , Lucien and Napoleon Bonaparte.
(2) — By a Relative or a Person Under Obligation: —
"Julius Caesar" by Shakespeare, "La Mort de Caesar"
by Voltaire; "Brutus II" by Alfieri. In "La Mort de
of the Nineteenth
Caesar" there is a reappearance
Unrecognized),
so strong was
(Slaying of a Kinsman
the desire to recall the works of antiquity!
(3)_By Partisans:— "Wallenstein" by Schiller;

"Cromwell"

by

Hugo;

"Marius

Vaincu"

(Mortier,

1911).

(B) — Rebellious Ambition (akin to VIII, A 1): —
"Sir Thomas Wyat" by Webster; "Perkin Warbeck" by
Ford ; "Catilina" by Voltaire

; Cade's insurrection in the
"Henry IV."
Shakespeare's
part
of
second
—
C (1) Ambition and Covetousness Heaping Crime
Upon Crime:— "Macbeth" and "Richard III"; "Ezzelino" (A. Mussato) ; part of the "Cinq Doigts de Birouk"
(Decourcelle, 1883) ; "La-Bete Feroce" (Jules Mary and
Emile Rochard, 1908) ; "La Vie Publique" (Fabre,
1901). In comedy: "Ubu-roi" (Jarry). In fiction: "La
Fortune des Rougon" (with criminality attenuated to

111

112

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

want of dignity) ; "Son Excellence Eugene"
(sacrifice of morality) ; the story of Lucien de Rubempre ; a case of greed : "La Terre."
(2)— Parricidal Ambition :—"Tullia" by Martelli..
Ambition, one of the most powerful of passions, if it
be not indeed the passion par excellence will always
affect the spectator strongly, for he feels and knows
ihat, once awakened in a man, it will cease only
with his death. And how many are the objects of its
desire! Tyrannical power, high rank, honors, fortune
(by inheritance, marriage, robbery, etc.), the conserva
tion of riches (avarice), glory (political, scientific, lit
erary, inventive, artistic), celebrity, distinction.
We have seen in Class A the ties which may unite
the ambitious one and his adversary and the Situations
which may result from them (XIX, XXIII, XXIV).
Here is one way among many to intensify the fury of
C : mingle with it the sincerity of a f aith, of a convic
tion; such a combination is found in the case of the
Spaniards in Peru and in Flanders, and in the case of
our own "gentle and intellectual"
race
under the
League and under the Terror; in the case of Calvin,
and of the Inquisition.
simple

THIRTY-FIRST SITUATION
CONFLICT WITH A GOD
(A Mortal; an Immortal)
Most anciently treated of all Situations is this strug
Into its Babel of dramatic construction all or
nearly all of the others may easily enter.
For this is
the strife supreme; it is also the supreme folly
It offers the most
and the supreme imprudence.
unprecedented
aims of ambitions, audacious enter
prises, titanesque conspiracies, Ixionian abductions;
the most fascinating
of enigmas; the Ideal here
undergoes a rare assault of passions;
prodigious
rivalries develop.
As for the surrounding witnesses,
does not their sympathy often go to him whom
they should hate? — learning of his crime, is it
not sometimes their duty to punish him them
selves, to sacrifice him to their faith, or to sacri
fice themselves for him? Between the dearest
of
kindred, hatreds will break forth. Then comes the
storm of disaster, the vanquished one bound to mis
fortune, crushed before those whom he loves, unless,
— acme of horror— he has, in a transport Of blind de
lirium, dishonored or massacred them unknowingly.
Suppliants, seeking the lost loved one, advance sad
theories and endeavor to disarm rancor,— but the
divine vengeance has been unchained !
This remarkable grouping has been in our day almost
entirely ignored. Byronists as we still are, "bon gre
mal gre," we might yet dream of this superb onslaught
on the heavens.
But no ! — we treat even the evangel
ical subject of the Passion, while we pass by, like owls
in broad daylight, this genuinely dramatic situation,
gle.

113

8

114

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

and content ourselves with sanctimoniously intoning
the idyllo-didactic phrases which preceded the sacred
tragedy, — itsefrieft unseen.

A

(1)—Struggle Against

a Deity:— "The iEdon"The
"Pentheus"
and

ians" and "The Bassarides,"
Wool-Carders" . by Aeschylus ; "The Bacchantes" of
Euripides; the "Christ Suffering" of Saint Gregory
Nazianzen. , Epic: the sixth Homeric hymn (to
Dionysos) ; the dream of Jacob.
(2)— Strife with the Believers in a God:— "The
Exodus of the Hebrews" by Ezekiel ; "L'Empereur
Juhen" XMiracle of Notre-Dame, XIV Century) ;
Historic instances: various persecutions
"Athalie."

Epic: "Les Martyrs."
B (l)^-Controversy With a Deity:— "The Book of
Job." I cannot give, it is true, the date nor the place
But the fact of actual
of the "premier" of "Job."
representation by Messieurs A, B and C and Misses X,

Y

and Z is no more an indispensable condition to the
existence of true drama than it is an all-sufficient one.
We may hold that the "premier" was given in that
great Theatre of which Brahmanic legend tells ; a Thea
tre inaugurated long before that of man, arid thanks to
which the gods may occupy the leisures of their

eternity.
(2)— Punishment for Contempt of a God :—"Teftltra
Yadjgna" by Vedyanatha Vatchespati; "Le Festin de
Pierre" (meaning the real actiori, which from the be
ginning leads toward the denoumeht).
(3)— Punishment fb* PrMe BeWki "a rG8fli^
Aeschylus' "Ajax Lbcrian" (according to one hypoth
Euripides'
''Belteresis) ; Sophocles* "Thamiras";
opKbn." A Christian example : Simon the Magician.
{4)— Prestinfptudus Rivalry with a God:— "The
Nurses" by Aeseljylus ; "Niobe" by Sophocles ; '"ta
ttfetrdti Pa|te" (Miracle of Notre-Dame, XIV Century).

THIRTY-FIRST SITUATION

115

(5) — Imprudent Rivalry With a Deity: — Sophocles'
"Eumele" ; in part "Phaeton" by Euripides.
May it not be possible that we shall one day see
treated from the point of view of this Situation, the
pathetic death of Guyot-Dessaigne, Minister of Justice ?

THIRTY-SECOND SITUATION
MISTAKEN JEALOUSY
(The Jealous One; The Object of Whose Possession He
Is Jealous; the Supposed Accomplice; the Cause
or the Author of the Mistake)
The last element is either not personified (A), or per
sonified in a traitor (B), who is sometimes the true
rival of the Jealous One (C).
A (1) — The Mistake Originates in the Suspicious
Mind of the Jealous One: — "The Worst is not Always
Shakespeare's "Comedy of
Certain" by Calaeron;
Errors"; "The Bondman" by Massinger; the "Mari
anne" of Dolse and of Tristan l'Hermite; "Tancrede"
and "Marianne" by Voltaire ; "la Princesse de Bagdad"
by Dumas ; "Un Divorce" (Moreau, 1884) ; "Monna
Vanna" (Maeterlinck, 1902). How is it that Moliere
has not written a comedy of jealousy, upon this Situa
tion symmetrical to that of "L'Avare" ?
(2) — Mistaken Jealousy Aroused by a Fatal Chance:
— Voltaire's "Zaire" and the opera of that name by de
la Nux; part of "Lucrece Borgia." In comedy: "La
Divorcee" (Fall and Leon, 1911).
(3) — Mistaken Jealousy of a Love Which is Purely
Platonic: — "Love's Sacrifice" by Ford (in which the
wife is unjustly suspected)
"L'Esclave due Sevoin"
(Valnay, 1881, in which it is more particularly the re
spectful admirer who is wrongly suspected).
Of a
Flirt:— "Suzette" (Brieux, 1908); "Four Times Seven
are Twenty-Eight" (Coolus, 1909).
116

THIRTY-SECOND SITUATION

117

by Malicious
Aroused
(4) — Baseless Jeasousy
Rumors: — "Le Pere Prodigue" by Dumas; "le Maitre
de Forges" (Ohnet, 1883).
B (1) — Jealousy Suggested by a Traitor Who is
and
Moved by Hatred: — Shakespeare's "Othello"
"Much Ado about Nothing"; "Semiramide Riconosciuta" by Metastasio presents the fully developed
denouement of it.
(2) — The Same Case, in Which the Traitor is Moved
"La
by Self-interest: — Shakespeare's "Cymbeline";
Fille du Roi d'Espagne" (Miracle of Notre-Dame, XIV
Century).
(3)— The Same Case, in Which the Traitor is Moved
by Jealousy and Self-Interest: — "Love and Intrigue"
by Schiller.
C
(1) — Reciprocal Jealousy Suggested to Husband
by Massinger.
and Wife by a Rival: — "The Portrait"
—
(2) Jealousy Suggested to the Husband by a Dis
missed Suitor: — Voltaire's "Artemire"; "Le Chevalier
Jean" (Joncieres, 1885).
(3) — Jealousy Suggested to the Husband by a Wom
an Who is in Love With Him: — "Malheur aux Pauvres"
(Bouvier, 1881).
(4) — Jealously Suggested to the Wife by a Scorned
Rival:— "The Phtiotides" of Sophocles.
(5) —Jealousy Suggested to a Happy Lover by the
Deceived Husband: — "Jalousie" (Vacquerie, 1888).
The number of dramatic elements brought into play
already enables us to foresee many combinations for
this Situation, whose improbabilities the public is
always disposed to accept, however great they may be.
we may remark,
Without abusing this indulgence,
even at first glance, that almost all the dramas above
cited treat of jealousy on the part of a man, whereas
experience teaches us that woman is quite as ready as
man to let herself be misled by the envious, by a rival,
or by a suitor bent upon securing for himself, through

118

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

the anger aroused, a pleasure
otherwise out of his
Transference to the feminine of the cases al
reach.
ready considered will thus furnish a series of new sit
uations. Besides pride, self-interest, love, spite and

rivalry, manyother motives present themselves for the
traitor or traitress ; the motives mentioned may also be
painted in colors yet unused. The denouement (usual
ly a murder, in some cases a suicide, in others a

divorce) may be varied, subtilized or strengthened by
secondary and instrumental characters. The same may
>b» said for the various knots of the intrigue, for those
false proofs, those diabolic suggestions from which the
jealeusy springs.
Under the form of "jealous spite" this situation has
been used by Moliere and other writers of comedy for
the purpose of filling in — through the agitations it
causes the principal lovers — the vacancies of the pic
ture with minor characters.

3

THSHTY-THIfiD SITUATION
ERRONEOUS JUDGMENT
(The Mistaken One; the Victim of the Mistake; the*
Cause or Author of the Mistake; the Guilty Person.)
'

-j

—

.

,

-

(Any sort of mistaken judgment may here

.

be

,

un:
derstood, even though committed only in the thought
of one person to the detriment of another.)
.

A

Suspicion Where Faith is Necessary :
—"The Serpent Wolnan'' by Gozzi; "L'Etndiant
p3tivre"^Mffloe^r', 18891). One of the facets? of
"fferiry V" is cOtfhected somewhat remotely with this
si'taatjoii', 4he ^hcdmpfehension of the young prince's
re^^aractfer by the Witnesses of his disorders. Dumas
pere" has represented Henri de Navarre as misunder
stood in the same way by his entourage.
<2J—Fiflsfe Suspicion (in which the jealousy is iibi;
WMbtit reason) of a M&stre'ss.-— Part Of "Diane" by
Angler; "Marie Stuart" by Alfleri.
?3)ii^Faise Suspicioiis Aroused by a Misunderstood
Attittide of a BbVed One :^"The Raven" by Gozzi;
(Sardou,
"Hypsipilei"
by Metastasio;
"Theodora"
1884) ; part of "La Reine Fiammetta" ; "Le Voleur"
(Bernstein, 1906) ; "Lt& Grands" (Weber and Basset,
1909) ; "Coeur Mate'riiei" (Franck, 1911)..
(France,
(4) — By Indifference: — "CrainquebilJe"
1909); "le Vierge" (Valfette).
B (1)— False Suspicions Drawn Upon Oneself' to"
Save a Friend: — "Aimer Sans Savoir Qui" by Lope;
"Mnie. Anibros" (Widor, 1885) .
iiy^&ix&y Fall Upon the irtnocetit :— ''Sirbes" by
Mita^tasio; "m "tMrrde tza" ^Bouvier, 1$®,) ; "Le
( 1 )— False!

119

120

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

(Dornay, 1887 and
Fiacre No. 13" and "Gavroche"
1888); "L' Affaire des Poisons "(Sardou, 1907); "Les
Pierrots" (Grillet, 1908). Upon the Innocent Husband
of the Guilty One:— "La Criminelle" (Delacour, 1882).
(3)— The Same Case as 2, But in Which the Inno
cent had a Guilty Intention : — "Jean Cevenol" (Fraisse,
1883). In Which the Innocent Believes Himself
Guilty:— "Le Roi de i' Argent" (Milliet, 1885) ; "Poupees Electriques" (Marinetti) .
(4) — A Witness to the Crime, in the Interest of a
Loved One, Lets Accusation Fall Upon the Innocent: —
"Le Secret de la Terreuse" (Busnach, 1889) .
C
(1) — The Accusation is Allowed to Fall Upon an
Enemy:— "La Pieuvre," (Morel, 1885).
(2)— The Error is Provoked by an Enemy:— "The
Palamedes" of Sophocles and of Euripides; "LeVentre
(Bernede,
de Paris" (Zola, 1887; "Le Roi Soleil"
(Forest,
"L'Homme
a
Deux
Tetes"
1911) ;
1910). This
nuance alone, it will be observed, attracted the Greek
tragedians, who were, so to speak, tormented by a
vague conception of the Iago of a later age and who
tried, in a succession of distorted types, to produce it ;
we seem, in these works, to be assisting at the birth of
the future Devil; of the evangelic Judas — and at that
of the type of Jesus in Prometheus and Dionysos. This
nuance C 2 seems to me a singularly fine one ; it is, for
instance, that of the "anonymous letter," and it will be
admitted that a more admirably repugnant gargoyle
cannot be imagined than the creature who crouches
with pen in claw and malignant smile, to begin such a
piece of work!
(3) — The Mistake is Directed Against the Victim by
Her Brother: (here is included also the Twelfth,
"Hatred of Kinsmen") :—"The Brigands" by Schiller;
"Don Garzia" by Alfieri.
D (1) — False Suspicion Thrown by the Real Cul
prit Upon One of His Enemies: — Corneille's "Clitan

THIRTY-THIRD

SITUATION

-

121

dre," and "Sapho"
(Gounod, 1884) ; "Catharine la
Batarde" (Bell, 1881).
(2) — Thrown by the Real Culprit Upon the Second
Victim Against Whom He Has Plotted from the Begin
ning: — "Le Crime d'un Autre" (Arnold and Renauld,
This is pure Machiavellianism, obtaining the
1908).
death of the second victim through an unjust punish
ment for the murder of the first.
Add to this the
closest relationship between the two victims and the
deceived judge, and we have all these emotions assem
bled: discovery of the death of a relative; supposed
discovery of an impious hatred between two relatives;
belief even in a second case of crime, aggravated this
time by a scheme of revolt ; finally the duty of con
demning a loved one believed to be guilty. This plot
then, is a masterly one, since it groups, under the im
pulsion of an ambition or a vengeance, four other
Situations. As for the "Machiavellianism" which has
set it all in motion, it consists, for him who employs it,
precisely in the method which is habitual to writers, a
method here transferred to a single character; he ab
stracts himself, so to speak, from the drama, and, like
the author, inspires in other characters the necessary
feelings, unrolls before their steps the indispensable
circumstances, in order that they may mechanically
move toward the denouement he desires. Thus is de
veloped the "Artaxerce" of Metastasio.
Suppress the part of the villain, and suppose for a
moment that the author has planned the denouement
desir ed by this traitor ; the bringing about of the most
cruel results from a "suppo^d fratricide" and the
"duty of condemning a son."
The author cannot
otherwise combine his means to produce it. The type
of the Villain (who has successively appeared in many
guises) is nothing else than the author himself, masked
in black, and knotting together two or three dramatic

tiki

THIRTt-SIX DRAMATIC SrftJAflONS

situations, lie belongs, this type; to the family of the
poetic Prologue, of the "Deus ex machina" (although
more admissible) of the Orator of the parabases, of the
Molieresque Valet, and of the Theorist
(the good
He
doctor, clergyirian, journalist, "family friend").
is in short the old Narrator of the monodramas.
Nothing could be more naif, consequently, than this
creature, whose unconvincing artificiality has spoiled
many a scene.
(3) — False Suspicion Thrown Upon a Rival: —
"Diana" (Paladilhe, 1885) ; "L'Ogre" (Marthold, 1890) ;
"LaBoscotte" (Mme. Maldagne, 1908).
(4)— Thrown Upon One Innocent, Because He Has
Refused to be an Accomplice : — "Valentinian" by Beau
mont and Fletcher ; "Aetius" by Metastasio.
(5) — Thrown by a Deserted Mistress Upon a Lover
Who Left Her Because He Would Not Deceive Her
Husband:— "Roger-la-Honte" (Mary, 1888).
(6) — Struggle to Rehabilitate Oneself and to Avenge
Caused: — "La Degringoa Judicial Error Purposely
lade" (Desnard, 1881) ; the end of "Fiacre No. 13."

THIRTY-FOURTH SITUATION
REMORSE
(The Culprit

;

the Victim or the Sin

;

the Interrogator)

Unknown
Crime: —
(1) — Remorse for an
"Manfred" and other creations of Byron; the last of
the great English dramatists, he was likewise the last
adversary of Cant, which, having killed art in Spain
under the name of the Inquisition, in England the first
time under the name of Puritanism and in Germatiy
under the name of Pietism, today presents itself in
France, in the guise of
.
.
.
Monsieur Ber-

A

enger.

(2) — Remorse for a Parricide: — "The Eumenides"
of Aeschylus; the "Orestes" of Euripides, of Voltaire
and of Alfieri ; "Le Cloitre" (Verhaeren) .
(3) — Remorse for an Assassination: — "Crime and
Punishment" (Dostoievsky, 1888) ; "Le Coeur RevelaFor a Judicial
teur" (after Poe, by Aumann, 1889).
Murder:— "L'Eclaboussure" (Geraldy, 1910).
(4) — Remorse for the Murder of Husband or Wife:
— "Therese Raquin" by Zola; "Pierrot, Assassin de sa
Femme" (Paul Margueritte, 1888).
B ( 1 ) — Remorse for a Fault of Love : — "Madeleine"
(Zola, 1889).

(2)— Remorse for

an

Adultery :—"Count Witold"

(Rzewuski, 1889) ; "Le Scandale" (Bataille, 1909).
With B (1) there are connected, in one respect, the
plays classed in A (1) of Situation XXVII.
Need I call attention to the small number, but the
terrible beauty, of the above works? Is it necessary
to indicate the infinite varieties of Remorse, according
123

124

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

to: 1st, the fault committed (for this, enumerate all
crimes and misdemeanors included in the legal code,
plus those which do not fall under any law; the fault,
moreover, may at the writer's pleasure be real or
imaginary, committed without intention, or intended
but not committed — which permits a "happy ending'1
—or both intended and committed; premeditated or
not, with or without complicity, outside influences, sublety, or what not) ; 2nd, the nature, more or less im
pressionable and nervous, of the culprit; 3rd, the sur
roundings, the circumstances, the morals which pre
pare the way for the appearance of Remorse — that fig
ure plastic, firm and religious among the Greeks, the
beneficially enervating phantasmagoria of our Middle
Ages ; the pious dread of a future life in recent cen
turies ; the disturbance of the equilibrium of the social
instincts and consequently of the mind according to
the inferences of Zola, etc.
With Remorse is connected the Fixed Idea; through
its perpetual action it recalls Madness or Criminal
Passion. Often it is but "remorse for a desire," re
morse the more keen in that the incessantly reviving
desire nourishes it, mingles with it, and, growing like
a sort of moral cancer, saps the soul's vitality to the
point of suicide, which is itself but the most desperate
of duels. "Rene," "Werther," the maniac of the
"Coeur Revelateur" and of Berenice" (I refer to that of
Edgar Poe) and especially Ibsen's "Rosmersholm,''
offer significant portraits of it.

THIRTY-FIFTH SITUATION
RECOVERY OF A LOST ONE
(The Seeker; the One Found)

This is the Situation of "The Hero and the Nymph"
by Kalidasa; the second part of his "Sakuntala," and
the "Later Life of Rama" by Bhavabuti; the second
part also of "A Winter's Tale" and "Pericles" by

Shakespeare; likewise of "Berthequine"
of
and
Notre-Dame,
XIV
"Bertha au Grand Pied" (Miracles of
Century) ; of almost all of "La Reine Aux Trois Fils,"
another Miracle; it is the Situation of "Thyestes in
Sicyon" by Sophocles and of "Alcmeon in Corinth" by
Suripides. It is the denouement of "Pere Chasselas"
(Athis, 1886) ; "Foulards Rouges" (Dornay, 1882) ; "La
Gardienne" (Henri de Regnier) ; it is the old familiar
plot of the "stolen child" and of stories of found
lings ; of arbitrary imprisonments, from the Man in the
Iron Mask (upon whom Hugo began a drama) and
"Richard Coeur-de-Lion" down to recent tales of sane
persons confined as lunatics. It is
the point from
which bursts forth so frequently that double explosion
of the principal scene: "My daughter! — My mother!"
Classes A and C of Situation XI move toward the
same end.

In other

cases

it is the part of the child to discover

his father, his kinsman, and to make himself known;
thus it is in the "Enfances Roland;" in "Les Enfants
du capitaine Grant" by Jules Verne and "les Aventures
de Gavroche" (Darlay and Marot, 1909).
To the invariably happy and epithalamic ending to
our plays built upon this Situation, and to the fortuit
125

126

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

ous coincidences with which

it

has been too generous

ly interlarded, I attribute the public's final weariness
of it. For does not this Situation retain more natural
ness

than the Nineteenth, and how fecund has been

that Nineteenth, whose charm and tempting variety is
all possessed by our Thirty-Fifth

!

THIRTY-SIXTH SITUATION
LOSS OF LOVED ONES

(A Kinsman Slam ;

a Kinsman Spectator

;

an

Executioner)
Here all is mourning. In long funeral processions we
see them pass, the heroes of this Situation; they move
from the dark home to the dark church, and from
there to the cemetery, returning only to weep by the
hearth until they leave it on the departure of another
from among them.
A (1) — Witnessing the Slaying of Kinsmen, While
Powerless to Prevent it:— The "Niobe" and "Troilus"
of iEschylus ; "Polyxena" and "The Captives" of Soph
ocles ; a part of his "Laocoon ;" "The Troades" of Euri
pides and of Seneca.
(2) — Helping to Bring Misfortune Upon Ones People
Through
Secrecy: — "Les
Professional
Baillonnes"
Terni,
(Mme.
1909).
B — Divining the Death of a Loved One: — "The In
truder" and "The Seven Princesses" by Maeterlinck,
the one modern master of the Thirty-Sixth, and how
powerful a one!
C — Learning of the Death of a Kinsman or Ally: —
Part of the "Rhesus" attributed to Euripides ; "Penthesilea," "Psychostase" and "The Death of Achilles"
by iZEschylus; "The Ethiopians" of Sophocles.
Here
is added the difficult role of the messenger of misfor
tune — he who bends beneath
the imprecations of
Cleopatra, in Shakespeare.
From comedy: — "Cent
Lignes Emues" by Torquet.
127

128

THIRTY-SIXTH

SITUATION

D — Relapse into Primitive Baseness, through Des
pair on Learning of the Death of a Loved One: — "La
Fille Sauvage" (Curel, 1902).
But embody, in a human figure, the wrong, the mur
der, which is abstract in most of these examples.
Still
bound by his helplessness, how the unfortunate who is
made a spectator of the agony will struggle, appeal,
and vainly implore the heavens — the Victim, meantime,
humbly beseeching him who thus looks on in despair,
as though he had power to save. The haughty sar
donic silhouette of the Executioner
dominates the
scene, intensifying the keenness of the grief by his
cynical pleasure in it .
.
.
Dante has conceived
sharper
sorrow
in
the
circles
of his Inferno.
no
of

CONCLUSION
To obtain the nuances of the Thirty-Six Situations,
I have had recourse almost constantly to the same
method of procedure; for example, I would enumerate
the ties of friendship or kinship possible between the
characters; I would determine also their degree of con
sciousness, of free-will and knowledge of the real end
toward which they were moving. And we have seen
that when it is desired to alter the normal degree of
discernment in one of the two adversaries, the intro
duction of a second character is necessary, the first
becoming the blind instrument of the second, who is at
the same time invested with a Machiavellian subtlety,
to such an extent does his part in the action become
purely intellectual. Thus, clear perception being in the
one case excessively diminished, it is, in the other,
proportionately increased. Another element for modi
fying all the situations is the energy of the acts which
must result from them. Murder, for instance, may be
reduced to a wound, a blow, an attempt, an outrage, an
intimidation, a threat, a too-hasty word, an intention
not carried out, a temptation, a thought, a wish, an in
justice, a destruction of a cherished object, a refusal
a want of pity, an abandonment, a falsehood.
If the
author so desires, this blow (murder or its diminu
tives) may be aimed, not at the object of hatred in per
son, but at one dear to him. Finally, the murder may
be multiple and aggravated by circumstances
which
the law has foreseen. A third method of varying the
situations : for this or that one of the two adversaries
whose struggle constitutes our drama, there may be
9

129

130

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

substituted a group of characters animated by a single
desire, each member of the group reflecting that de
sire under a different light. There is, moreover (as I
have already shown), no Situation which may not be
combined with any one of its neighbors, nay, with two,
three, four, five, six of them and more! Now, these
combinations may be of many sorts; in the first case,
the situations develop successively and logically one
from another; in the second case they dispose them
selves in a dilemma, in the midst of which hesitates
the distracted hero ; in the third case, each one of them
will appertain to a particular group or a particular role ;
in the fourth, fifth, sixth cases, etc., they are repre
sented according to two, or according to all three of
the cases already brought together in one situation,
and together they escape from it, but the majority of
them fall therefrom into a position not less critical,
which may even offer but a choice between two courses
equally painful; after finding a way between this
Scylla and Charybdis, the very leap by which they es
cape precipitates them into a final Situation resulting
from the preceding ones, and which sweeps them all
away together.
This, be it understood, is
.
.
.
but one combination among a thousand, for I cannot
here elaborate the system by which this study of the
Thirty-Six Situations may be continued, and by means
of which they may be endlessly multiplied; that -is a
subject for a separate work upon the "Laws of Liter
ary Invention."
The composition or arrangement of the chosen Sit
uations — and at the same time of the episodes and
characters introduced — may be deduced in a manner
somewhat novel and interesting, from the same theory
of the "Thirty-Six."
Considering, in effect, that
, "every dramatic
situation springs from a conflict
principal
between
two
directions of effort" (whence at
[
the same time comes our dread of the victor and our

CONCLUSION

131

pity for the vanquished), we shall have to choose, at
the rising of the curtain, between two beginnings; we
must decide which of the two adversaries pre-exists.
This leads us infallibly to make of the second the cause
(innocent or responsible) of the drama, since it is his
appearance which will be the signal for the struggle.
The first, who especially enlists our attention, is the
Protagonist, already present in the earliest Thespian
tragedy, altogether lyric, descriptive and analytic; the
second — the obstacle arising or supervening —is the
Antagonist, that principle of the action which we owe
to the objective and Homeric genius of jEschylus. One
of two strongly opposing colors will thus dominate the
entire work, according as we shall choose, near the be
ginning, which of the two parties shall possess the
greater power, the greater chance of victory.
Aristotle has taught us to distinguish between
"simple" tragedy (in which the superiority remains
upon the same side until the end, and in which, conse
quently, there is no sudden change of fortune, no sur
prise) and "complex" tragedy (the tragedy of surprise,
of vicissitude), wherein this superiority passes from
one camp to the other. Our dramatists have since re
fined upon the latter ; in those of their pieces which are
least complicated, they double the change of fortune,
thus leading ingeniously to the return of the opposed
powers, at the moment of the spectator's departure, to
the exact positions which they occupied when he en
tered the hall; in their plays of complicated plot, they
triple, quadruple, quintuple the surprise, so long as
their imaginations and the patience of the public will
permit. We thus see, in these vicissitudes of struggle,
the first means of varying a subject. It will not go
very far, however, since we cannot, however great our
simplicity, receive from the drama, or from life, more
than one thousand three hundred and thirty-two sur
prises. — One thousand three hundred and thirty-two?

i32

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

— Obviously; what is any

if

not the
Situation,
passing from a state of calm into a Dramatic
or from one Situation into another, or again into a
state of calm? Perform the multiplication; result, one
thousand, three hundred and thirty-two.
Shall we now inquire whence arise these vicissitudes,
these unexpected displacements of equilibrium? Clear
ly in some influence, proceeding from a material object
Upon this Third
a circumstance, or a third personage.
—
Actor whose introduction into the drama was the tri
umph of Sophocles — must rest what is called the Plot.
He is the unforeseen element, the ideal striven for by
the two parties and the surrounding characters ; he is
fantastically divided and multiplied, by two, by three,
by ten, by even more, to the point of encumbering the
scene ; but he is always himself, always easily recogniz
able. Some of his fragments become "Instruments,"
some, "Disputed Objects," some, "Impelling Forces;"
they range themselves sometimes beside the Protagon
ist, sometimes near the Antagonist, or, moving here
and there, they provoke that downfall the incessant
avoidance of which is called — for events as for man
kind — Progress. In this way they clearly show their
origin — that "Role-Lien" (Jocaste in "Seven Against
Thebes," Sabine in "Horace") under which the Third
Actor was germinating in iEschylean tragedy, without
yet taking a positive part in the action.
It will be seen that the appearance of these figures
of the second plan, these Choruses, Confidants, Crowds,
Clowns, even Figurants re-enforced by those of the
original groundwork, precursors whose importance
ranges from Tiresias to the Messenger of "Oedipus the
King," from prophet to porter, modifies most power
fully the effect of the ensemble, especially if we reflect
that each one of these, considered separately, has his
own especial motives for action, motives soon appar
ent in regard to the characters who surround him> in
keen surprise

CONCLUSION

133

some dramatic situation subordinate to the dominant
one, but none the less real; the turns and changes of
the general action will affect him in some particular
way, and the consequences, to him, of each vicissitude,
of each effort, of each act and denouement, contribute
to the spectator's final impression. If the Third Actor,
for instance, be a Disputed Object, it becomes neces
sary to take into account his first and his last posses
sor, the diverse relations which he has successively had
with them, and his own preferences. If he appear as
Inspirer or Instigator, we must consider (aside from
his degree of consciousness
or unconsciousness,
of

frankness or dissimulation, and of

Will proper)

the

perseverance which he brings to his undertaking ; if he
be unconscious, the discovery which he may make of
his own unconsciousness; if he be a deceiver,
the discoveries which others may make of his dis
simulation ("others" here meaning perhaps a single

character,
perhaps
the spectator).
These re
marks also apply to the "Instrumental" role; and
not alone these remarks, but those also which concern
the "Object," are applicable to the Role-Lien.
I have already observed that this last role, and the
triple hypostasis of the Third Actor, may be repro
duced in numerous exemplars within one play. On the
other hand, two, three, or all four of them may be
fused in a single figure, (Lien-Instrumental, ObjectInstigator, Instrument-Lien-Object, etc), combinations
which present themselves, like the combinations of the
Situations, already considered, in varied array. Some
times the hero who unites in himself these divers roles
plays them simultaneously — perhaps all of them
toward an individual or group, perhaps one or
several of them toward an individual or group, and
another role wherein these roles mingle, toward
some other individual or group; sometimes these var
ious roles will be successively
played toward the

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

134

several; some
times, finally, the hero plays these roles now simul
taneously, and again successively.
But it is not possible to detail in these pages, even
if I so desired, the second part of the Art of Combina
tion; that which we in France call by the somewhat
All
feeble term (as Goethe remarked) "composition."
that I have here undertaken to show is, first, that a
single study must create, at the same time, the epi
sodes or actions of the characters, and the characters
themselves; for uppon the stoge, what the latter are
may be known only by what they do; next, how in
vention and composition, those two modes of the Art of
will,
empty word!)
Combination (not Imagination,
in our works to come, spring easily and naturally from
the theory of the Thirty-Six Situations.
Thus, from the first edition of this little book, I
might offer (speaking not ironically but seriously) to
dramatic authors and theatrical managers, ten thou
sand scenarios, totally different from those used re
peatedly upon our stage in the last fifty years * * *
* * * "The scenarios will be, needless to say, of a
realistic and effective character. 1 will contract to de
liver a thousand in eight days. For the production of
a single gross, but twenty-four
hours are required.
Prices quoted on single dozens. Write or call, No. 19,
Passage de l'Elysee des Beaux-Arts.
The Situations
detailed,
will be
act by act, and, if desired, scene by
same individual or group, or

scene"

But

*

I

*

toward

*

hear myself accused, with much violence, of an
intent to "kill imagination." "Enemy of fancy!" "De
stroyer of wonders !" "Assassin of prodigy !" * * *
These and similar titles cause me not a blush.
A singular history, in truth, is that of the "Imagin
ation." Certainly no one in classic times thought of
priding himself upon it. Far from it! Every novelty,
on its first appearance, hastened to support itself by

CONCLUSION

135

From 1830 dates
appeal to some antique authority.
the accession to the literary throne of this charlatanesque "faculty," analysis of which is, it would seem,
eternally interdicted. The results of this new regime
were not slow in appearing, and they may be seen, in
their final decay, among the last successors of ultra-

Mysterious crime, judicial
romantic Romanticism.
error, followed by the inevitable love affair between the
children of slayer and victim ; a pure and delicate work
ing-girl in her tiny room, a handsome young engineer
who passes by; a kind-hearted criminal, two police
spies, the episode of the stolen child; and in conclu
sion, for the satisfaction of sentimental souls, a double
love-match at the very least, and a suicide imposed
upon the villain— this, one year with another, is the
product of the Imagination. For the rest, in the whole
field of dramatic romanticism (which corresponds so
well to the Carrache school of painting) Hugo alone has
created, thanks to what? — to a technical process
patiently applied to the smallest details, — the antithesis
of Being and of Seeming.
Ore vigorous blow was, for the moment, given to
this legend of the Imagination by Positivism, which
asserted
that this so-called creative faculty was
merely the kaleidoscope of our memories, stirred by
chance. But it did not sufficiently insist upon the in
evitably banal and monotonous results of these chance
stirrings, some of our memories — precisely those least
interesting and least personal — repeating themselves
a thousand times in our minds, returning mercilessly
in all manner of methodless combinations. These
souvenirs of innumerable readings of the products of
imitation in our neo-classic and Romantic past, envel
ope and overwhelm us unless we turn to that observa
tion of nature which was pointed out by the
Naturalists' initiative as an element of renovation.
Even the Naturalists themselves have too often viewed

136

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

reality athwart their bookish recollections; they have
estimated too highly the power of the artistic temper
ament, however vigorous it may be, in assuming that

it

could interpose itself, alone and stripped of all con
vention, by a simple effort of will, between Nature
and the literary product to be engendered.
Thus "La
"judicial
Humaine"
has
repeated
Bete
the
error" in that
special form which is as common in books as it is rare

in life ; thus the starting-point of "LCEuvre" is merely
the converse of the "thesis" of the Goncourts and
Daudet; thus reminiscences of "Madame Bovary" ap
pear in many a study of similar cases, which should,
nevertheless, remain quite distinct; — and thus has
appeared, in the second generation of "naturalists," a
new school of imitators and traditionalists.
And all the old marionettes have reappeared, inflated
with philosophic and poetic amplifications, but too
often empty of symbolism, as of naturalism and
humanism.
As to the methods of the Art of Combining, the
truth may be grasped by one bold look, one triumphant
glance at all these phantoms of trite thought, as they
stand in their respective places in the foregoing cate
gories. Any writer may have here a starting-point
for observation and creation, outside the world of paper
and print, a starting-point personal to himself, original
in short, — which does not in the least mean improb
able or unconvincing, since many situations which have
today an appearance of improbablitiy have merely
been disfigured by persons who, not knowing how to
create new ones, have complicated the old, entangling
themselves in their own threads,
Especially will the invention of an unusual story,
the discovery of a "virgin field," (to use the naturalists'
term) be made so easy as to be almost valueless. We
are not unaware of the importance, in the perfecting of
Greek art, of the fact that it was circumscribed and

CONCLUSION

137

restricted to a small number of legends (GEdipus,
Agamemnon,. Phaedra, etc.,), which each poet had in
his turn to treat, thus being unable to escape compari
son, step by step, with each of his predecessors, so that
even the least critical of spectators could see what
part his personality and taste had in the new work.
The worst which may be said of this tradition is that
it rendered originality more difficult. By a study of
the Thirty-Six Situations and their results, the same
advantage may be obtained without its accompanying
Proportion
inconvenience.
Thenceforth
will
alone
assume significance.

By proportion

I

mean, not a collection of measured
formulae which evoke familiar memories, — but the
bringing into battle, under command of the writer, of
the infinite army of possible combinations, ranged ac
cording to their probabilities.
Thus, to make mani
fest the truth or the impression which, until now, has
been perceptible to him alone, the author will have
to overlook in a rapid review the field before him, and
to choose such of the situations and such of the details
as are most appropriate to his purpose. This method
— or, if you will, this freedom and this power —he will
use, not only in the choice, the limitation and fertiliza
tion of his subject, but in his observation and medita
tion. And he will no more run the risk of falsifying,
through pre-conceived ideas, the vision of reality than
does the painter, for example, in his application of laws
equally general, and likewise controlled by constant

experimentation, — the divine laws of perspective !
Proportion, finally realizable in the calm bestowed by
complete possession of the art of combining, and re
covering the supreme power long ago usurped by
"good taste" and by "imagination," will bring about the
recognition of that quality more or less forgotten in
By this I mean, not the skil
modern art, — "beauty."
ful selection of material from nature, but the skilful

138

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

and exact representation — with no groping, no un
certainty, no retention of superfluities — of the partic

ular bit of nature under observation
But it is more than this, for these two definitions,

the eclectic and the naturalist, concern but a limited
number of the arts, and but one side of them; that
small number to which imitation is open (painting,
literature of character, and, in a limited way, sculp
ture) , and tnat side of them which is purely imitative.
What significance have these two definitions (both of
which rest upon the reproduction of reality, the one
exalting and the other belittling it) if they be con
fronted with Music, with the didactic poetry of a
Hesiod, with the Vedic incantations, with true statu
ary, simplified and significant, from the mighty chiselstrokes of Phidias or of the XIII Century, with purely
ornamental or decorative art, — the "beauty" of a
demonstration in geometry, — or finally with Architec
ture, now reviving in silence and obscurity, that art
which comes periodically to reunite and, like an ark, to
rescue the others, that art which shall once more
return to lead us away from the prematurely senile
follies of our delettanti and sectarians.
Upon a like height stands a principle greater than
Naturalism with its experimental method, or Ideal
ism which gives battle to it, — Logic.
It is by methods of logic that Viollet-le-Duc has en
abled us to estimate truly the marvels of our "grand
siecle," the XIII Century, substituting (to cite only
this) for the simple admiration of 1830 before each
stone saint so "picturesquely" perched upon the point
of an ogive, the builders' explanation: that a stone of
the exact weight and dimensions of the saint was there
absolutely necessary, to prevent the breaking of the
ogive under a double lateral pressure, — whence the in
stinctive satisfaction it gives our eyes. It is a great
misfortune that the understanding of that magnificent

CONCLUSION

139

age in which a Saint Louis presided over the multiple
communal life, an age whose only equal in the world's
history is that in which Pericles directed, from the
Athenian metropolis, an identical movement, — that
this understanding, which would be so useful to us,
should have been horribly compromised in the Ro

Hugo's "Notre-Dame de Paris,"
mantic carnival.
wherein the public believed it beheld a portrait of our
"moyen-age" (a most absurd appellation, by the way),
represents it, by a singular choice, as already long
dead, — after the Hundred Years' War which bled us to
the point where we fell, passive and defenseless, under
the domination of the Florentine national art called
"renaissant," and then of various other influences, an
cient and foreign, during four centuries. And, down
to the very moment at which I write, the literary pro
ductions upon the subject of this most incomparable
period of our past have been but pitiable affairs.
But
yesterday, a Renan was writing of ogival art as an
effort which had been impotent ("Souvenirs d'Enfance
et de Jeunesse") or which at most had fathered works
of no enduring character ("Priere sur l'Acropie") ; the
very Catholic Huysmans, in his "En Route," was
making the most astounding salad of Roman vaulting,
Primitive painting, Gregorian plain-chant, — a salad
whose recipe is "the Faith" and which is called, natur
ally, the "Moyen-age," — that age which embraces ten
centuries of humanity, plus one-third of humanity's
authentic history, three epochs strongly antagonistic
to each other, peoples widely diverse and opposed; a
something equivalent to a marriage between Alcibiades
and Saint Genevieve.
The "Moyen-age," or, to speak more accurately, the
XII, XIII, and XIV Centuries, were not in the least
fantastic and freakish ; this is the character merely of
an occasional generation, such as that of LouisPhilippe.
Neither were they mystic, in the present

140

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

sense of that word. The architecture of those cen
turies grew, stone by stone, plan by plan, out of the
In their sculpture there
most practical of reasons.
—
was nothing "naive"
the naivete is ours, when we so
estimate that sculpture, which is far more realistic
than our own; and if, persisting in the contrary
opinion, we cling to the weird forms of the gargoyles,
it may be said that, born of a symbolism akin to those
of Egypt and Greece, they represent analogies equally
ingenious and profound. In this period arose Thomism, lately called back into a position of honor to
combat Positivism, and which realized so happy a
harmony between Aristotelianism and Christian faith,
between science and theology. In this period, too;
were born the natural sciences, and, in the minds of its
poets, evolved the laws by which our poetry lives today,
those rhythms which through Ronsard we still hear,
that Rhyme which we gave to all Europe, — and, at the
same time, thy groined vaultings, 0 little town of

Saint-Denis, suzerain oriflamme, pilot-barque of France !
All these were born, and grew, beneath the grave gaze
of the same wisdom which, on the Ionian shores, was
called Athene.
Toward a new aspect of the same logic our own age
already turns, since, having drunk of that antiquity by
whose forces we ruled Europe a second time in the
XVII Century; having drunk of the latest of great
foreign influences, the Germanic, we are returning to
reality and to the future. Thus, when each Greek
city had absorbed the neighboring local cults (its
"foreign influences") and the Oriental cults (the
"antiquity" of that day), the most beautiful of
mythologies were formed. It is, at least, toward an
art purely logical, purely technical, and of infinitely
varied creations, that all our literary tendencies seem
to me to be converging. In that direction proceed
Flaubert and Zola, those rugged pioneers,
Ibsen.

COtfCLtJSiON

i4i

Strindberg, and all writers deliberately unmindful of
their libraries, as the Hellenes were of barbarian litera
ture; there moves Maeterlinck, having reduced action
to the development of a single idea; Verlaine, deliver
ing from conventional rules true rhythm, which makes
for itself its own rules; Mallarme, prince of ellipse,
clarifying syntax and expelling clouds of our little
parasite words and tattered formulae ; in that direction
Moreas calls us, but without freeing himself, unfortun
ately, from the Italianism of our so-called Renaissance ;
all these, and others not less glorious, a whole new
generation springing up, futurists, "loups," cubists,
seem to me to be seeking the same goal, the final
abolition of all absolute authority, even that of Nature
and of our sciences her interpreters; and the erection
upon its debris of simple logic, of an art solely
technical, and thus capable of revealing an unknown
system of harmony ; in brief, an artists' art.
In literature, in dramatic literature which is the
special subject of our consideration, the investigation
of Proportion of which I have above spoken will show
us the various "general methods" of presenting any
situation whatever. Each one of these "general
methods,'' containing a sort of canon applicable to all
situations, will constitute for us an "order" analogous
to the orders of architecture, and which, like them,
will take its place with other orders, in a dramatic
'"system."
But the systems, in their turn, will come
together under certain rubrics yet more general, com
parisons of which will furnish us many a subject for
In that which we might call Enchantment,
reflection.
systems as far apart
there meet, oddly enough,
drama;
in origin
as
Indian
certain
comedies
of Shakespeare
("A Midsummer Night's Dream";
"The Tempest"), the "fiabesque" genre of Gozzi,
the Mystery brings together the
and "Faust;"
works of Persia, Thespis and the pre-Aeschyleans,

142

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

"Prometheus," the book of "Job," the stage of the
tragic Ezekiel, of Saint Gregory Nazianzen, of
Hroswitha, the Jeux and Miracles of our XIII Century,
the Autos; here, Greek tragedy and the psychologists'
imitations of it; there, English, German and French
drama of 1830; still nearer, the type of piece which
from the background of China, through Lope and
Calderon, Diderot and Goethe, has come to cover our
stage today

It will

....

be remembered

that, when we were catalogu

ing dramatic production in its thirty-six classes, an
assiduous effort to establish, for every exceptional case
found in one of them, symmetrical cases in the other
thirty-five caused unforseen subjects to spring up un
der our very feet. Likewise, when we shall have analyz
ed these orders, systems and groups of systems, when
we shall have measured with precision their resem
blances and their differences, and classified them, or,
one by one, according to the questions considered, shall
have brought them together or separated them, — we
shall necessarily remark that numerous combinations
Among these the New Art will
have been forgotten.
choose.

Would that I might be able to place the first, the
obscurest foundation-stone of its gigantic citadel !
There, drawing about her the souls of the poets, the
Muse shall rise before this audience re-assembled from
ancient temples, before these peoples who gathered of
yore around Herodotus and Pindar; she will speak the
new language — the Dramatic — a language too lofty
for the comprehension of the single soul, however great
it be, — a language not of words but of thrills, such as
that spoken to armies, — a language in truth addressed
to thee, 0 Bacchus, dispenser of glory, soul of crowds,
delirium of races, abstract, but One and Eternal ! Not
in one of our parlor-like pasteboard reductions of the
Roman demi-circus will this come to pass, but upon a

CONCLUSION

143

sort of mountain, flooded with light and air, — raised,
thanks to our conquest of iron added to the construc
tive experience of the Middle Ages; offered to the na
tion by those who have still held to the vanity of riches,
— a greater thing than the theater of Dionysos where
gathered thirty thousand people, greater than that of
Ephesus wherein sat, joyous, a hundred and fifty
thousand spectators, an immense orifice-like crater in
which the earth seems to encompass the very
heavens

i

ALPHABETICAL INDEX
Of the Plays, Novels, Etc., Classified in the Situations
of this Work

Abbé Constantin (The), by L. Halevy
XXVIII
Abduction of Helen (The), by Lope de VegaX
Abduction of Helen (The) by Sophocles
X
Abhirama mani, by Soundara Misra
X
Abraham, by the Abbess Hroswitha
XX
Absente (L'), by Villemer
XXVII
Abufar, by Ducis
XVIII
Achilles in Scyros, by Metastasio
XX
Adelaide Duguesclin, by Voltaire
XIV
Adelghis, by Manzoni
V
Adrien, by Metastasio
XXIV
Aedonians (The) by Aeschylus
XXXI
Aegeus, by Euripides
XIX
Aetius. by MetastasioXXXIII
Affaire Clemenceau (L'), by Dumas fils
XXV
Affaire de la rue de Lourcine (L') by LabicheXVI
Affaire des Poissons (L'), by Sardou
XXXIII
Affaires sont le- Affaires (Les), by MirbeauxXVII
Agamemnon, by Aeschylus
XV
Agathocle, by Voltaire
XIV
Agave, by Stace
XXXI
Age Critique (L'), by Byl
XXV
Agésilas, by Corneille
XXIV
Agis, by Alfieri
XIII
Agnimitra and Malavika, by Ealidasa
XXIV
Aiglon (L'), by Rostand,
VII
Aimer sans savoir qui, by Lope de Vega
XIV
and XXXIII

XVI

Ajax, by Sophocles
145

A

B
B
C
D
B
B
B

A

3
2

C
C

A
B

D
D

A
B

A

A

A

A
C

A
D
D
B

2

D

B
B

1

10

146

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Ajax Locrian, by Aeschylus
Ajax Locrian, by Sophocles

Alcalde of Zalamea (The), by Calderon
Alceste, by Sophocles
by Euripides
by Buchanan
by Hardy
by Quinault
by Racine (projected)
by Lagrange-Chancel
by Boissy
by Sainte-Foix
by Coypel
by Dorat
by Gluck
by H. Lucas
by de Vauzelles
Alcmene, by Aeschylus
Alcmeon, by Sophocles
Alcmeon, by Euripided
Aletes and Erigone, by Sophocles
Alexander, by Sophocles
Alexander, by Euripides
Alexander, by Metastasio
Alexander, by Racine
Almanzor, by Heine
Alope, by Euripides
Alzire, by Voltaire
Amazones (Les), by Mazel
Amelie, by Voltaire
Amhra, by Grangeneuve
Ami Fritz (L') by Erckmann-Chatrian
Amour, by Hennique
Amphitryon, by Sophocles
Anarghara-ghava (Hindu, anonymous)
Ancetre (L'), by Saint-Saens
Andre del Sarte, by Musset
Ancien (L') by Richepin
Andromache, by Euripides
Andromaque, by Racine
Andromeda, by Euripides
Andromeda, by Sophocles
Andromede, by P. Corneille
Ane de Buridan (L'), by de Flers and
de Caillavet

-XXXI
V

B
B

-III

A
A
A
A
A
A
A

x^r

-XXI

XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI
XXI

A
A

A
.

XVIII
XXV
XXV

III

XIX
XIX
V
V

XXIX

I

XXIV

A

A
A
A
A

XIX
X

XXIX

XXV

A
C

1

1
1
1

]
1
1

1
1
1

4
1
1

C

C

A

4

A

3

A

6
4

B

A
A
A
F
C
B
C

A

II

11

A
A

XXIV

B

II

1

1

XXI
XXI

XXV

1

4

A

XV

1

B
B

XIV

XXVIII

1

2

A

III

2

D

iir

XXIX

3

D
B

2

2
6
2
1

3
2
6
4

2
2
1

A
6

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Angelo, by Hugo
XXV
Angles du Divorce (Les), by Biollay
XXVIII
Antigone, by Metastasio
XIV
"
by Sophocles
XX
"
byEuripides
XX
"
by Alamanni
XX
"
by Alfleri
XX
Antiope, by Euripides
II
A"toinette Sabrier, by Coolus
XXV
Antony and Cleopatra, by Shakespeare
XXII
Aphrodite, by Louys
XXII
Apotre (L'), by Loyson
XXVII
Appius and Virginia, by Webster
XXIV
Apprentie (L') by Geffroy
XX
Apres moi, by Bernstein
XXV
Archelaus, by Euripides
VI
Argent (L'), by Zola
VI
Argives (The), by Aeschylus
III
Ariane, by T. Corneille
VI
Arlesienne (L'), by Daudet and Bizet
XXII
3 VIII
Armee dans la Ville (L'), by Jules RomainsVIIl
Arsene Lupin, by Leblanc
V
Artaxerxes, by Metastasio
XXXIII
Artemire, by Voltaire
XXXII
XXIV
Article 301, by Duval
Ascanio, by Saint-Saens
XXIV
(L'),
by
Decourcelle
XXVII
de
trefle
Aa
(L'),
by
Zola
Assommoir
XXII
Atalanta, by Aeschylus
IV
Athalie, by Racine
XXXI
Athamas, by Aeschylus
XVI
XIII
Atree et Thyeste, by CreMlon
XXIV
Attentat (L'), by Capus and Descaves
XXIV
Attila, by P. Corneille
III
Attila, by Werner
I
Augeus by Euripides
VIII
Automne (L'), by Adam and Mourey
XIV
(L'),
by Donnay
Autre Danger
Aventures de Gavroche (Les), by Darlay
and

Aveu

Marot

(L'),

by Sarah Bernhardt

147

c
E
B

1

1

A
A
A
A

3

c

3

B

A
A
D

A

3

3
3
1

4
3
2
3

c

D

c

1
1

B

A

1

D

1

B

5
2

A
A
D
.

c

2
2

C

c

D

3

c

2

A

2

B

A

A
A
A
A

1

2
7
4
1

B
B
B

2

XXXV
XXV

C

4

XXXI

A

1

2
4

B
Bacchantes

(The), by Euripides

148

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Baillonnes (Les), by Mme. Terni
XXXVI
Bajazet, by Racine
XXfV
Banque de l'Univers (La), by GrenetDancourt
XVII
Barlaam et Josaphat, Miracle of Notre-DameX
Barricade (La), by Bourget
XXIV
Bassarides (The), by Aeschylus
"IfXXI
Beethoven, by Fauchois
VII
Belle aux cheveux d'or (La), by Arnould XVII
Bellerophon, by Euripides
XXXI
Benvenuto, by Diaz
XXIV
Bercail (Le), by Bernstein
XXV
Berenice, by Racine
-XX
Berenice, by Poe
XXXIV
Berthe au grand pied, Miracle of NotreDame
XXXV
Berthequine, Miracle of Notre-Dame
XXXV
Bete feroce (La), by Jules Mary and RochardxXX
Bete humaine (La), by Zola
XVI
Bleus de l'amour (Les), by Coolus
XXVIll
Blind (The), by Maeterlinck
VII
Bluebeard, by Perrault
II
Blue Bird (The), by Maeterlinck
IX
Blue Monster (The), by Gozzi
XIX
Bohemos, by Zamacois
XXXIV
Boislaurier, by Richard
XIV
Bondman (The), by Massinger
Bon roi Dagobert (Le), by Rivoire
Boscotte (La), by Mme. Maldagne
Bouchers (Les), by Icres
Bride of Messina (The), by Schiller
Brigands (The), by Schiller
Britannicus, by Racine
Broken Heart (The), by Ford
Brutus, by Voltaire
Brutus II, by Alfieri
Bucheronne (La), by C. Edmond
Burgraves (Les), by Hugo
By Fire and Sword, by Sienkiewicz

Cain, by Byron
Canace, by Speroni

andll

XXXII

XVIII

XXXIII

A
B

D

A
A
D
C
B
B
C
B
B

C

A
C

D

A
D
G

A
A
A
A
D
M

A

XXXIII
XIV
XXIX
XXVII

A
A

XXX

XXIV

XIX
XXVI

4

A

III

XVIII

2

A
C

D

A
A
F
C

XIII

A

1

XXVI

C

2

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Capitaine Burle (Le), by Zola
XXII
Captives (The), by Sophocles
XXXVI
Carbonari (Les), by No
XXIX
Carians (The), by Aeschylus
X
Casquette au pere Bugeaud (La), by MarotHI
Casse-museau, by Marot
XXVII
Casserole (La), by Metenier
Catherine la Batarde, by Bell
XXXIII
Catilina, by Voltaire
VIII \

III

Cato, by Metastasio
Cellule No. 7 (La), by Zaccone
Cenci (The), by Shelley

andXXX
V

III

XIII

Cent lignes emues, by Torquet
Cesar Birotteau, by Balzac

B

ni

3

andXXVI

XXXVI

XX
andVI

C est la loi, by Cliquet
Chamillac, by Feuillet
Champairol (Les), by Fraisse
Chantecler, by Rostand
Charbonniere (La), by Cremieux
Chevalerie Rustique, by Verga
Chevalier Jean (Le), by de Joncieres
Chien de garde (Le), by Richepin
Chinese Hero (The), by Metastasio
Choephores (The), by Aeschylus
Christ Suffering, by St. Gregory Nazianzen
Chryses, by Sophocles
Chrysippus, by Euripides
Cid (Le), by P. Corneille
Cinna, by P. Corneille
Cinq doigts de Birouk (Les), by
De Courcelle
Circuit (Le), by Feydeau and de Croisset
Citta morta (La), by d'Annunzio
Clavijo, by Goethe
Cleopatre, by Sardou
Clitandre, by P. Corneille
Cloitre (Le), by Verhaeren
Coeur a coeur, by Coolus
Coeur a ses raisons (Le), by de Flers
and de Caillavet
Coeur de Se-hor, by Michaud d'Humiac

XXV

XXVI

I
VIII

XXI
XXIV
XXXII
XXI
XXVIII
IV
XX

I

XXVI
XXIX

149

c

A
A
A
A
D

A
D

A
B
C
B
B

A
B
B
B
B

A
D

A
C
D

D
B
C

XXV

XIV
XXVII

8
5

3
2
1

10
2

A

XXX

III

4

A
A
A

A

XXII
XXXIII
XXXIV

5

3

C

A

VIII

XXIV
XXVI

3

1
1

C
C

A
A

D

A
C

D
D

6

150

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

XXXIII
Coeur material, by Franck
Laumann,
after
(Le),
by
revelateur
Coeur
Poe
.XXXIV
.
Colomba, by Mérimée
Errors,
by
Shakespeare
Comedy of
XXXII
Compagnon de voyage (Le), by Anderson
xi
Compère le Renard, by Polti
V
,XXIV
Comte d'Essex, by T. Corneille
Comtesse Sarah, by Ohnet
XXV
Connais-toi, by Hervieu
XXII
Conquête de la Toison d'or (La), by P. Cor
neille
XXIV
Conquête de Plassans (La), by Zola
XXII
Conspiration du général Malet (La), by de
Lassus
VIII
Constant Prince (The), by Calderon
XX
Conte de Noël, by Linant
XIII
Corbeau (Le), by Gozzi
XXXIII
Corbeaux (Les), by Becque
VII
Cor fleuri (Le), by Mikhael and Herold
XXIV
Coriolanus, by Shakespeare
VI
Cornette (La), by M. and Mlle. Ferrier
XXI
Count of Carmag1 ola (The), by Manzoni
V

III

and

VI

Count Witold, by Rzewuski
XXXIV
Countess Fredegonde (The), by Amigues
XXV
Course du flambeau (La), by Hervieu
XXI
Courtisane (La), by Arnyvelde
XXVII
Courtisane de Corinth (La), by Carré and
Bilhaud
III
Cousine Bette (La), by Balzac
XXII
Crainquebille, by France
XXXIII
Cresphontes, by Euripides
XIX
Cretans (The), by Euripides
XXVI
Creusa, by Sophocles
XIX
Crime de Jean Morel (Le), by Samson
XXIX
Crime de Maisons- Alfort (Le), by Coedés
Crime d'un autre (Le), by Arnold and Ren
auld
XXXIII
Crime and Punishment, by Dostoievsky
XXXIV
Criminelle (La), by Delacour
XXXIII
Crocodile (Le), by Sardou
XXVII
Croisade des Enfantelets francs (La), by

in

Ernault

Cromwell, by Hugo

VII

XXX

A

3

A
A
A
B

A
B

c
A
B

A

A
A
F
A

B
B
C
D
C
C
B
B

3
1
1
1

2
7

e:
B

6

C
C

A
B

E
B
B

A
D

A
B
B

2
3
2
5

B

A

3

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
.Cuirs de Boeuf (Les), by Polti
Cymbeline, by Shakespeare
Cyrano de Bergerac, by Rostand
Cyrus, by Metastasio

.

XXVI.
XXXII
XXI '

XIII

andXIX

Damaged Goods, by Brieux
Dame a la faulx (La), by Saint-Pol Koux
Dame aux Camelias (La), by Dumas fils
Dame au domino rose (La), by Bouvier
Damon, by Lessing
Danae, by Euripides
Danae, by Aeschylus
Danaides (The), by Aeschylus
"
by Gombaud
"
"
by Phrynichus
by Salieri
by Spontini
Danseur inconnu (Le), by Bernard
Dante, by Godard
Death of Achilles (The), by Aeschylus
Death of Cansa (The), by Crichna Cavi
Debacle (La), by Zola
Decadence, by Guinon
Declassee (La), by Delahaye
Dgdale ( Le ) , by Hervieu
Deformed Transformed (The), by Byron
Degringolade (La), by Desnard
Demetrius, by Metastasio
Demon du foyer (Le), by George Sand
Demophon, by Metastasio
Denise, by Dumas fils
Depute Leveau (Le), by Lemaitre
Dernier Amour, by Ohnet
Desert Isle (The), by Metastasio
Dette (La), by Trarieux
Deux Jumeaux (Les), by Hugo
Devant l'ennemi, by Charton
Devotion to the Cross, by Calderon
Dhourtta narttaka
Dhourtta samagama
Diana, by Paladilhe
Diane, by Augier

.

XVII
XXIV
XXVII

XVIII

XIV

I
iXXIH

XXHf
XXIH

XXIII
XXIII

151

A
B
C

C
B

C
B
B
C
D
B
B
B
B
B

2

B

3

2

3.
3
3

B

XXVIII
XXIV

A

XIII

C
C

XXXVI

9
6

A

VI

A

1

III

C
B

4

D

3

XXV

XXIV
IX
XXXIII
XXIV
XIV
XIX
XXVII

XXV
XXV
-XH

XIV
VII
XXIV
V

XXII

XXIV
XXXIII
XXI

A
D

A
A
A
B
B
B

B
B

A
A
A
A
A
D
C

1

1

6
5
4
1

3
3
6
1

8
1

9
3
1

152

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Diane de Lys, by Dumas fils
Dictys, by Euripides
Dido, by Metastasio
Dieu ou pas Dieu, by Beaubourg
Disciple (Le), by Bourget
Discovery of the New World, by Lope de
Vega
Divorce (Le), by Bourget
Divorce de Sarah Moore (Le), by Rozier
and Paton
Divorcée (La), by Fall and Leon
Docteur Pascal, by Zola
Don Carlos, by Schiller
Don Garzia, by Alfieri
Don Juan, by Dumas père
"
by Goldoni
"
by Grabbe
"
"
by Molière
"
"
by Sadwell
"
"
by Tellez
"
"
by Tirso de Molina
"
"
by Zamora
"
by Zorilla
Pèdre,
by Voltaire
Don
Don Quixote, by Cervantes
Don Sanche, by Corneille
Drapeau (Le), by Moreau
Droit au bonheur (Le), by Lemonnier
Duchess of Mal fi (The), by Webster
Duel (Le), by Lavedan

XXV

II.
xx-

c

3

B
B

2

XXIX

III

A
A

IX
XXVIII

D
D

XXI
XXXII
XXVI
XXVI
XXXIII

A
A

V
V

V

V
V

V
V
V

V

XIV

II

XXIV
XXIV
XXI
XXIX

B

3
3

1
1

2
2
2

B

2

C
B
B
B
B
B

3

B

B
B
B

A

2

A

A
A

6
8

C

2

XIII

A

1

XXIV

A

A

1

E
Earthen Toy-cart (The), by Sudraka
Echéance (L'), by Jullien
Eclaboussure (L'), by Geraldy
Ecole des veufs (L'), by Ancey
Edith, by Bois
Egmont, by Goethe
1812, by Nigond
Electra, by Sophocles
"
by Euripides
by Attilius
by Q. Cicero
"
by Pradon

XXV

XXXIV
XXVI
V
V

XIV
IV
IV

IV
IV

IV

5

C

8

B

3

A

3

C
C

A
A
A
A

A
A

1
1

1
1
1

1

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Electra, by
"
by
"
by
"
by
by
Eleusinians,

iV

Longepierre
Crebillon
Rochefort
Chenier

IV

IV

IV-

IV
IV

Guillard

by Aeschylus
Emigrants (Les), by Hirsch
XV
Emigre (L')( by Bourget
XXVIII
XXIV
Emilia Galotti.by by Leasing
Empereur Julien (L') Miracle of Notre
Dame
XXXI
XIV
Enchantement (L'), by Bataille
VII
En detresse, by Fevre
V
Enemy of the People (An), by Ibsen
XXV
Enigma (The), by Hervieu
XX
Enfant du Temple (L'), by de Polhes
>moYYYV
jrne AAA v
Enfants du Capitaine Grant (Les), by VerneXXXV
Enfants naturels (Les), by Sue
XVIII
En greve, by Hirsch
XXIV
Eole, by Euripides
XXVI
Epigones (The), by Aeschylus
III
IV
Epigones (The), by Sophocles
,
Erechtheus, by Euripides
XXIII
Eriphyle, by Sophocles
IV
Eriphyle, by Voltaire
IV
XVII
Esclarmonde, by Massenet
XXXII
Esclave du devoir (L'), by Valnay
Esmeralda (La), by Hugo
XXIV
Esther, by Racine
I
XVI
Etau (L'), by A. Sardou
Ethiopians (The), by Sophocles
XXXVI
Et ma soeur? by Rabier
XXVIIL
Etrangere (L'), by Dumas ftls
Etudiant pauvre (L'), by Milloecker
XXXIII
Etudiants russes, by Gilkin
XXVII
Eumele, by Sophocles
XVII

III

Eumenides (The), by Aeschylus

andXXXI

XXXIV

and

Europa, by Aeschylus
Euryale, by Sophocles
Eurysaces, by Sophocles
Evangeliste J[L'), by Daudet
Exode (L'), by Fauchois

I

X

XIX
I
XX

XXIX

153

A
A
A
A
A

A
A
A

1
1
1
1
1

2
1

1

C

A

2

C

2

A

4

C
D

1

A

4

A
A
C

A

A
A
A
A

2
7

2
1
1
1
1
1

B

2

A

11

A
C
D
C

3
1

B
B

7

D

1

B

5

A
A
A
A
A

1

1

2
1

B

2

C

2

B

A

1

4

154

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Exodus of the Hebrews (The), by Ezekiel
Ezzelino, by A. Mussato

XXXI

XXX

A
c

2
1

F
Famille d'Armelles (La), by Marras
XXV
Faust, by Goethe
VI
Fantasio, by Musset
11
Fatal Dowry (The), by Massinger
XXV
Faute de l'abbe Mouret (La), by Zola
XXII
Feast of the Achaians, by Sophocles
IIIFedora, by Sardou
XXIX
XXV
Femme de Claude (La), by Dumas fils
XXV
Femme de demain (La), by Lefebvre
(La),
Bisson
by
XXVII
Femme X
XXIV
Fermière (La), by d'Artois
(Le),
by T. Corneille
XXXI
Festin de Pierre
XXXIII
Fiacre No. 13, by Dornay
XXIII
Fille a Guillotin (La), by Fleischmann
XXVII
Fille du député (La), by Morel
Fille du roi d'Espagne (La), Miracle off
XXXII
Notre-Dame
XVI
Fille Elisa (La), by E. de Goncourt
XXXVI
Fille sauvage (La), by de Curel
XX
Fils de Jahel (Les), by Mme. Armand
XXIV
Fils de Porthos (Le), by Blavet
XII
Fils naturel (Le), by Dumas fils
XXVII Flore de Frileuse, by Bergerat
VIII
Fontovéjune, by Lope de Vega
XXX
(La),
by Zola
Fortune des Rougon
Fortune and Misfortune of a Name, by
XXIX
Calderon
XIV
Fossiles (Les), by de Curel
XXXV
Foulards rouges (Les), by Dornay
XXV ,
Francillon, by Dumas fils
xxiv
Messager
les
bas
bleus,
by
François
XXV
Rimini,
de
by
A.
Thomas
Françoise
XXI
Frère d'armes (Le), by Garaud
.XIII
Frères ennomis (Les), by Racine
Frères Zemganno (Les), by E. de GoncourtXXI
:XXi
XXIV
Friquet (Le), by Willy and Gyp
XXI
Fugitive (La), by Picard
XXII
Furie (La), by Bois

D
D
B

c
A

B
B
C
B

A
c

B
D

A
A
B

A
D
B

A

2
1

2
5
1

2
5
7
9
1

2
6
3
3
2
2
2
5

B
B
B

2

C

1

B
B

1

B
B
C
D

2

6

2
6
3
1

A

2

B
C

6

B

A

1

2
5

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.

Gardener's Dog (The), by Lope de Vega
Gardienne (La), by de Regnier
Gavroche, by Dornay
Georgette, by Sardou
Gerfaut, by C. de Bernard
Germinal, by Zola
Germinie Lacerteux, by the Goncourts
Ghosts, by Ibsen
Glatigny, by Mendes
Glaucus Pontius, by Aeschylus
Glu (La), by Richepin
Gold Bug (The), by Poe
Goetz de Berlichingen, by Goethe
Grande Iza (La), by Bouvier
Grande Marniere (La), by Ohnet
Grand soir (Le), b^ Kampf
Grands (Les), by Veber and Basset
Great Expectations, by Dickens
Griffe (La), by Bernstein
Guebres (Les), by Voltaire
Guests (The), by Aeschylus
Giubor, Miracle of Notre-Dame

Hamlet, by Shakespeare
and

Hanouman, Hindu drama
Heaven and Earth, by Byron
Hecuba, by Euripides
Hedda Gabler, by IbseD
Helen, by Euripides
Helen Reclaimed, by Sophocles
Heliades (The), by Aschylus
Henry IV, by Shakespeare
Henry V, by Shakespeare

Henry VI, by Shakespeare
Henry VIII, by Shakespeare
Henri VIII, by Saint-Saens
Heraclides (The), by Aeschylus
"
"
by Euripides
Heraclius, by Corneille

XXXV

xxxm

B

2

VIII

c

6

B

2

XVIII

B

3

B

2

XXVII
XXV

XXII

XXIV

IX

XXII
XI

-v

XXXIII
XXiX

VIII

XXXIII

XXI

XXII
XIX
VII

XXIII
rv
XIII
•X

XXIV

III

XVI

X

XII
XIII

XXX
ind

155

IX
XXXIII
VI

XXV
XXV

I

I
xvm

A
c

A
A
B
C
B

A
A
A
A

1

1

3
5
1

2
2

I

3
2

A

2

B
B

4

A

1

C
C

2

A
A
A
C
C

1

2
3
1

A

1

B
B

1

A
B
B
B

A
A
B

1

5
5
1
1

o

1
1
1

2

B

xxii

3

A
A

XXIII
XXI
XXIII
XXIII

XXIII
XXIII
XXIII

XIX

XXIII
XXIII
XXIII

1

6
2

5 2
2 2 2 4
1

8
1
1

2
1

1

A
A
A

2

II

A

1

XXVI

A

1

XVII
XXVII
XVI
XXXVI
XXXVI

A

1

XXX
XXIV
XV

1

XXIII
XXIII

A
A
A
A

B

III

XXIU

D

by de Lorde
by Crebillon
"
by Lemiere
"
by Cienfuegos
Illusions perdues (Les), by Balzac
Image (L'), by Beauborg
Impasse (L'), by Fread Amy
Indigne, by Barbier
Indiscret (I/), by See
Inflexible (L'), by P?rodi
Ino, by Euripides
Insociale (L'), by Mme Aurel
Intruder (The), by Maeterlinck
Iobates, by Sophocles
Iolas, by Sophocles
Ion, by Euripides
Iphigenia, by Aeschylus
"
by Sophocles
Iphigenia in Aulis, by Euripides

Idomenee,

B B B B B

(I/),

V

Idiot

B C

1

XXIII

5

XXIII

2

X

2 2 2 3 3 3

XXVI
XXVI
XXIX
XXXIII

1

XXXV

c B B B

and

1

XXIV
XX

A

XXV

Herodias, by Flaubert
Hero and the Nymph (The), by Kalidasa
Hippolyte, by Euripides
by Seneca
."
His Own Gaoler, by Calderon
Homme a deux tetes (I/), by Forest
Homme de proie (L')> by Lefevre and
Laporte
Horace, by l'Aretin
"
by Corneille
(Le),
by Voltaire
Huron
Hypermnestre, by Metastasio
"
by Riupeiroux
by Lemierre, etc.
Hypsipyle, by Aeschylus
"
by Euripides
"
by Metastasio
'.'

A

B B B B B B D B B D

XIX

XVI
XVI

c B

Heracles Mainomenos, by Euripides
Hercules Furens, by Seneca
Hercules on (Eta, by Seneca
Hermione, by Sophocles
Hernani, by Hugo

X

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

156

INDEX PF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.

XXIII
Iphigénie â Aulis, by Racine
XIX
Iphigenia in Tauris, by Euripides
XIX
by Goethe
Iphigénie en Tauride, projected by Racine XIX
XXIX
Irène, by Voltaire
XIX
Israel, by Bernstein
Ixion, by Aeschylus
"
III
by Sophocles
"
by Euripides

III
III

Jack the Ripper, by Bertran and Clairian
Jack Tempête, by Elzéar
Jacobines (Les), by Hermant
Jacobites (Les), by Coppee

\

III

XXIV
XXV
XXV

VIII
Jacques Bonhomme, by Maujan
XXV
Jacques Damour, by Zola
XXXII
Jalousie, by Vacquerie
XXIII
Jarnac, by Hennique and Gravier
XXXIII
Jean Ceveno1, by Fraisse
XXIII
Jephthe, by Buchanan
XXIII
by Boyer
XIX
Jerusalem Delivered, by Tasso
VII
Halle
(Le),
by
de
la
Feuillee
Adam
de
la
Jeu
(Le),
by Adam
Jeu de Robin et de Marion
de la Halle
de Saint-Nicholas

Jeu
Job, by Moses (?)

(Le), by Jean Bodel

and

Joueurs d'osselets

(Les), by Aeschylus
and

Judgment of Arms (The), by Aeschylus
Julius Caesar, by Shakespeare
Jumeaux (Les), by Hugo

A
c
c
c

B

E

A

A
A

B

A
C
D
B
C
C

B
B

A
A
G
C

1
1

X
-II
XXXI

A
A
B

J

XXII
XXIV
XXI

A

1

A

2

XXII

Jocelyn, by Lamartine
"
by Godard
Joie de vivre (La), by Zola

157

HI

VII

XII

A
B

B
B
C

1

7

2

XXX
XXXV

A

Kermesse rouge, by Eekhoud

III

8

C
D

1

Kreutzer Sonata (The), by Tolstoi

VI
XXV

A
A

K

I

King John, by Shakespeare

and

1

1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

158

XIII

Labors of Jacob, by Lope de Vega
Laconian Women (The, by Sophocles
Lady from the Sea (The), by Ibsen
Lakm6, by Delibes
Laocoon, by Sophocles

IX
XXIV
XXIX
V

A
c

B

A
A

XXVI
Lawn-tennis, by Mourey
XXV
Legende du Coeur (La), by Aicard
XXII
Lelie, by Willy
XXIII
Lemnian Women (The), by Sophocles
XXVII
Lena, by Berton and Mme. van Velde
XIII
Life is a Dream, by Calderon
Wagner
Lohengrin, by
XXI
Loi de l'homme (La), by Hervieu
XIX
Minos,
by
Voltaire
Lois de
VIII
Lorenzaccio, by Musset
V
Calderon
Galicia,
by
Louis Perez of
XVII
Louis Leclercq, by Verlaine
XXXII
Love and Intrigue, by Schiller
XXXII
Love's Sacrifice, by Ford
XXIV
Loves of Krishna (The), by Roupa
Loves of the Three Oranges (The), by Gozzi XVIII
XXV
Lucienne, by Gramont
VI
Hugo
by
Borgia,
Lucrece

D
D
C
B
B

XXXV

II

XXIII

B

1,

XXXII A

2,

XIX B

Luther, by Werner
Lutte pour la vie (La), by Daudet
Lydie, by Miral
Lyncee, by Theodecte
"
by Abeille
Lys (Les), by Wolf and Leroux

1

and

XIX

B

A

2
1

2
2
4
2

C

A

A
C
B

A
D
D

A
C
D

A

XXIII
XXIII

B

XXVIII

1

A

XX
XV

XXIX

4

C

XXXVI

and

Later Life of Rama (The), by Bhavabuti

8

B

A
B
D

3
1

M

XXX
Macbeth, by Shakespeare
XXV
Flaubert
Bovary,
by
Madame
XXVII
Augier
Caverlet,
by
Madame
XXI
Madame de Maintenon, by Coppee
XXVI
Lyon
and
l'Amirale,
by
Mars
Madame
xxrv
Rachilde
Madame la Mort, by Mme.
ClairvilleVIII
and
Madame Margot, by Moreau
XXIX
Madame Therese, by Erckmann-Chatrian

\

C
C

A
B
B
B

A
A

8
2
4

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Madeleine, by Zola

Mlle, de Bressier, by Delpit
Mlle de Maupin, by Gautier
Madhouranirouddha, by Vira

B
B

XXIX

A
c
E

X

XIX

XXV

XII

XXV

Maître (Le), by J. Jullien
Maître Ambros, by Widor
Malatia and Madhava, by Bhavabuti
Malefllâtre (Les), by Porto-Riche
Malheur aux pauvres, by A. Bouvier
Maman Colibri, by Bataille
Manfred, by Byron
Mangeront-ils by Hugo

XXXIV
XXIX

XVIII

Mahaviracharita, by Bhavabuti
Mahomet, by Voltaire
Maidens of Trachis, by Sophocles
Maison d'argile (La), by Fabre
Maison des deux Barbeaux (La), by
Theuriet

XIII

XXXIII
and

X

XXIV

XXV

and

XXXII
XXII
XXXIV
XXIV

I

Mannequin d'osier (Le), by France
XXV
Manon Lescaut, by Prevost
XXVII
Maquignon (Le), by Josz and Dumur
-III
Marchande de sourires (La), by Judith
Gautier
XXIX
Mari (Le), by Nus and Arnould
vxv
Mariage d'André (Le), by Lemaire and de
Rouvre
XVIII
Mariage
de Mlle Beulemans
(Le), by
Fonson and Wicheler
XXIV
Mariage d'Olympe (Le), by Augier
XXVII
Marianne, by Dolce,
XXXII
Marianne, by Tristan l'Hermite
XXXII
Marianne, by Voltaire
XXXII
Marie Stuart, by Alfieri
XXXIII
Marie Stuart, by Schiller
XXIV
Marie Stuart, by Samson
XXIV
Marie Tudor, by Hugo
XXIV
Marino Faliero, by Byron
Marion Delorme, by Hugo
Marius vaincu, by Mortier
Marjolaine (La), by Richepin fils

159

B

A
c
B
B

c

A
c
c
c

A
A
A
c

B

1

2
4
2

1

3
4
1
1
1

3

7
3
1
1

3

3
4
i

A

1

B

7

C

1

B

1

A

3

B

A

A
A
A

8
1
1
1

2

B
B
B

3

2
2

and

XIX

C

1

B

4

and

XXVII
XIX
XXIV

A

VI

XXX

A

3

6

160

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Marquis de Priola (Le), by Lavedan
XXVII
Martyre, by Dennery
XXI
Martyrs (Les), by Chateaubriand
XXXI
Massiere (La), by Lemaitre
XIV
Master Builder (The), by Ibsen
XVII
Maternite, by Brieux
VI
Maucroix (Les), by Delpit
XIV
Measure for Measure, by Shakespeare
XXl
Medea, by Euripides
XXV
"
by Corneille
XXV
"
by Seneca
XXV
Mejor Alcalde el Rey (El), by Lope de Vegain
Meistersinger (Die), by Wagner
XXIV
Melanippe, by Euripides
XXIII
'
Meleager, by Sophocles
1^
Memnon, by Aeschylus
-IX $
Menages de Paris (Les), by Raymond
XXV
Mensonges, by Bourget
XXVII
Mer (La), by J. Jullien
-Xin
Merchant of Venice (The), by Shakespearem
Mere du Pape (La), Miracle of Notre-DameXXXI
Mere meurtrier de son enfant (La), Miracle
of Notre-Dame
XVII
Meres ennemies (Les), by Mendes
XXV
Merope, by Maffei
XlX
"
by Voltaire
XIX
"
by Alfieri
XIX
Message of Angada (The), by Soubatha
X
Mill (The), by Lope de Vega
XXIV
Minister's Ring (The), by Vishakadatta
XII
Minos, by Sophocles
I
'
Miroirs (Les), by Roinard
XXV
Miss Fanfare, by Gwiderax
XXV
Miss Sara Sampson, by Lessing
XXV
Mission de Jeanne d'Arc (La), by Dalliere VIII
Mithridate, by Racine
XIX
Mon ami Teddy, by Rivoire and Bernard
XXIV
XIII
Mon frere, by Mercereau
Monna Vanna, by Maeterlinck
XXXII
Monsieur Alphonse, by Dumas fils
XXVII
Monsieur Bute, by Biollay
XVI
Morat,
by
Monsieur de
XXV
Tarbe
Montansier (La), by Jeoffrin, de Flers and
de Caillavet
XXV
Monte Cristo, by Dumas pere
HI

A
,

C

A
B

]
1

2
1

A

1

D

1

A

1

D

2

A
A
A
A

A
B
B

1
1
1

3

9
1

B
B

2

B

7

3

D

B
B
C
B
B

B
B
C

A
A
A

6
4
2

2
1
1
1

2

5
1

D

1

B

7

A

1

B
B

1

A

2

A
A
B

A

1

7

1

7
3

B

3

C
B

3
4

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.

161

Montmartre, by Frondaie
XXVIII
Morte de Cesar (La), by Voltaire
XXX
Morte (La), by Barlatier
XXIV
Mouettes (Les), by P. Adam
XXIII
Mrigancalckha, by Viswanatha
XXIV
Mrs. Warren's Profession, by Shaw
XXVII
Much Ado About Nothing, by Shakespeare XXXII
Myrane, by Bergerat
XXV
Myrmidons (The), by Aeschylus
VI
Myrrha, by Alfieri
XXVI
Myrtille, by Erckmann-Chatrian
XXVIII
Mysians (The), by Aeschylus
I
Mystery of Adam (The), XII Century
VI

E

A

B

A
A
A

2

8
3
1

1

B

1

B

7

A
A
A
B

A

1
2
2
3
3

N
Nana, by Zola
XXII
Nana-Sahib, by Richepin
V
Nanine, by Voltaire
XXVIII
Natural Daughter (The), by Goethe
VII
III
Nauplius, by Sophocles
Nausicaa, by Sophocles
I
Necklace (The), by Sri Harshadeva
XXIV
Nemea, by Aeschylus
IX
Nereides (The), by Aeschylus
III
Nick Carter, by Livet and Bisson
III
Nicomede, by Corneille
V
Niebelung (The), by Wagner
V
Nina de Plata (La), by Lope de Vega
XXIV
Ninety-Three, by Hugo
XXIII
Niobe, by Aeschylus
XXVI
Niobe, by Sophocles
XXXI
Nitetis, by Metastasio
XXVIII
XXIX
Noces Corinthiennes (Les), by France
XXXI
Nurses (The), by Aeschylus
Nouveau Monde (Le), by Villiers de ITsle
Adam
XXV
Nuit de Saint- Jean (La), by Erckmann
XXIV
Chatrian
XXV
Numa Roumestan, by Daudet

Obstacle (L'), by Daudet
Octavia, by Seneca
Odette, by Sardou
11

XXIV

XV

XXVII

A

6

C

:

A
A
A

1

2

B

1

D

3

A

7

A
C
C
C

A

A
A
B

A
A

5
3
1

4
1

4

B

4

C

1

A

7

B

2

A

8

B

A

1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

162

XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII
XVIII

(Edipus, by Aeschylus
"
by Sophocles
"
by Corneille
"
by Seneca
"
by Voltaire, etc.
(Edipus at Colonus, by Sophocles
CEnee, by Sophocles
(Enomaus, by Sophocles

A
A

A
A

A
A
A

I

and

'

XII

II

B
D
D

IX

"

by Euripides
IX
CEuvre (L'), by Zola
XX
Ogre (L'), by Marthold
XXXIII
Oi'cles, by Sophocles
I
Olympiade, by Metastasio
XIX
Olympie, by Voltaire
XXIX
On ne badine pas avec l'amour, by MussetXVII
Opium, by Bonnetain
XXII
Or (L')( by .Peter and Danceny
III
Orbecche, by Giraldi
IV
Oreille fendue (L'), by Nepoty
XXVII
Orestes, by Euripides
XXXIV
Oreste, by Alfleri
XXXIV
"
by Voltaire
XXXIV
Orithyie, by Aeschylus
X
"
by Sophocles - ■
X
Othello, by Shakespeare
XXXII
—
Othon, by Corneille
XX-

Page blanche, by Devore
Pain d'autrui (Le), by Ephraim and
Schutz, after Turgeniev
Palamede, by Aechylus
Palamede, by Euripides
and

Palamede, by Sophocles
Pandore, by Voltaire
and

'

Pandore, by Goethe
Papa, by de Flers and de Caillavet
Paraitre, by Donnay
Parsifal, by Wagner
Partage de midi, by Claudel
Passagerea (Les), by Coolua

1
1

1
1

1

3
2
2
2

A

4

D

3

A

1

B

1

C
C

2

B

A

1

2
1

D

A

.

A
A

3

2
2

A

2

B

1

B

1

XXV

C

1

XIX

E

XI
XI
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXIV
XVII
XVII
XIV
XXV

IX

XV

XXIV

A
A

■

c
c
c
c
A
c
c
B
D

3
3
2
2
1
1

1
1
1

c

2

B

6

A

1

INDEX OP PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
fatrie, by Paladilhe and Sardou
Peau d'ane, by Perrault
Peche de Marthe (Le), by Rochard.
Peleus, by Sophocles

XXV

D

XXVI

and

Pelleas and Melisande, by Maeterlinck
Pelopides (The), by Voltaire
Penelope, by Aeschylus
Pentheus, by Aeschylus
Penthesilea, by Aeschylus
Pere Chasselas (Le), by Athis
Pere prodigue (Le), by Dumas ftls
Pericles, by Shakespeare

VII
VII

XIX'
XVII
XIX
XIV

XIII

XIV
XI
Xxxv

B
B

"
"

XXVI

XII

XII
XII

2
2
1

1

2

B

III

XIV

3

C

XXX

XXVI

1

4

A

I

1

c
E

XXXI
XXXVI

XXXI

1

7

B

VI
XXI
XXVI
XXVIII

and

3

B

A
A

'

XXXV

and

2

E

III

and

by Aeschylus
by Sophocles
by Euripides

c
c

XXVII

Pertharite, by Corneille
Petit ami (Le), by Leautaud
Petite amie (La), by Brieux
Petite Caporale (La), by Darlay and
IX \
Gorsse
\
Petite chocolatiere (La), by Gavault
XXVIII
Petite Hollande, by Guitry
XXIV
y
Petite milliardaire
(La), by Dumay and11
XXIV
Forest
Petite Mionne (La), by Richebourg
XIX *
Petite paroisse (La), by Daudet
XXV
Petit Jacques (Le), by Dennery
XXI
Petit Poucet (Le), by Perrault
VI
Phaedra, by Sophocles
XXVI
Phaeton, by Euripides
XVII

Philoctetes,

B
B

II

Peleus, by Euripides
Pelerin d'amour (Le), by Emile-Michelet
Peliades (The), by Euripides
Pelias, by Sophocles

Pheacians (The), by Sophocles
Phedre, by Racine
Philippe II, by Alfleri

A

XXVIII
and

Perkin Warbeck, by Ford
Terrhoebides (The), by Aeschylus
Persians (The), by Aeschylus

163

A

5

D

2

A
A
A
D

-

A
B

A

1

2

2
2
6
7

A

3

C

4

D
B

2

B
B
B
B
B

5

D
'

1

A

A
A
A

1

1
1
1
1

3
2

164

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

I
Philoctetes in Troy, by Sophocles
Phineus, by Aeschylus
IX
11
Phineus, by Sophocles
XX
Phoenissae (The), by Aeschylus
"
"
by Euripides
xm
XIII
by Seneca
XIV
Phoenix, by Euripides
IX
Phorcides (The), by Aeschylus
III
Phrixus, by Sophocles
[11
Phrixus, by Euripides
I
Phrygians (The), by Aeschylus
XXXII
Phtiotides (The), by Sophocles
Physician of his Honor (The), by Calderon XXV
XIV
Pierre et Jean, by Maupassant
XXVII
Pierre et Therese, by Prevost
XV
Pierre Pascal, by Mme. de Chabrihan
XXI
Pierre Vaux, by Jonathan
Pierrot assassin de sa femme, by
XXXIV
Margueritte
XXXIII
Pierrots (Les), by Grillet
XXXIII
Pieuvre (La), by Morel
Plus faible (La), by Prevost
XXVIII
Policiere (La), by Montepin
XXVII
XIX
Polydectes, by Aeschylus
XX
Polyeucte, by Corneille
XI
Polyidus, by Sophocles
"
XI
by Euripides
Polynice, by Alfieri
XUI
XXIV
Polyheme, by Samain
Polyxena, by Sophocles
XXXVI
111
Pompee, by Corneille
Port-Tarascon, by Daudet
XVII
Portrait (The), by Massinger
XXXII
Possede (Le), by Lemonnier
XXII
Pot-Bouille, by Zola
XXV
Poupees electriques, by Marinetti
XXXIII
Poussin (Le), by Guiraud
XXVIII
Powers of Darkness (The), by Tolstoi

XIII

E andXV
IXV

Pretre (Le), by Buet
Priestesses (The), by Aeschylus
Princesse de Bagdad (La), by Dumas fils
Princesse Georges (La), by Dumas fils
Princess Maleine (The), by Maeterlinck

III

XIX
XXXII
XXV

VII

b"

^,

B
B

2

A
A
A
B
B
B

2
3
1
1

3
2
4

B

4

B

4

c
D

4
1

A
A
A

2

D

1

1

1

A

4

B
C

2

A

]

2

C

F

2

B

1

A
A
A
A
A
A

4

C

4

C

1

A
C
B
D

1
1
1

5
7
3
2

A
A

1

C

2

A
B

A

1

1

3

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.

XXVII
XIX
IX
VII

Prince Zilah (The), by Claretie
Procris, by Sophocles
Prometheus, by Aeschylus
Prometheus Bound, by Aeschylus
and

Prometheus Unbound, by Aeschplus
Propompes (The), by Aeschylus
Proserpine,' by Vacquere and Saint-Saens
Protesilas, by Euripides
Psyche, by Corneille
Psychostase, by Aeschylus
Pulchérie, by Corneille
Purloined Letter (The), by poe

Quarts d'heure (Les), by. Guiches and
Lavedan
14

and

juillet (Le), by Rolland

4x7

equals 28, by Coolus

Question d'argent (La), by Dumas fils

V

IX

I

XXV
XX

XVII

XXXVI
XX

165

B
G

c
c

C
D
C

B

A

a

l

l

l

l
l
7
2

B
C

2

XI

A

B

3

XXV

XXVII

A
c

4

XXXII
XXIV

B

2

A
A

VIII

1

3
7

R
Raffles, by Hornung
V
Rama, by Bhavabuti
X
Ramuntcho, by Loti
XXVIII
Rantzau (Les), by Erckman-Chatrian
XXIX
Raoul de Crequi, by Dalayrac
XXV
Reformateur (Le), by Rod
VI
Regiment (Le), by J. Mary
XXVII
Regulus, by Pradon
XX
Regulus, by Metastasio
XX
(La),
fils
Miracle
of
Reine aux trois
NotreDame
XXXV
Reine Fiammette (La), by Mendes
XXXIII
and

Rembrandt, by Dumur and Josz
Rencontre (La), by Berton
René, by Chateaubriand
Renée, by Zola
Renée Mauperin, by the Goncourts
Resentment of Te-oun-go (The), by
Kouan-han-king

XXIX
VII

XXV
XXX IV

A
C

A

A
E
c
D

A
A
A

2
1

8

1

3
1
1

3

B

3

D
C

4

B

XXVI
XVII

B
C

2

III

B

3

2

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

166

XX

Resurrection, by Tolstoi
*
Rêve (Le), by Zola
Reveil (Le), by Hervieu
Révoltée, by Lemaître
Révoltés (Les), by Cain and Adenis
Rhadamiste et Zénobie, by Crébillon
Rhesus, by Euripides

I

XXI

XXV

m

XXV

IX

and

Richard Coeur-de-lion, by Sedaine
and

Richard II, by Shakespeare
Richard III, by Shakespeare
Risque (Le), by Coolus
Rivoli, by Fauchois
Robert-le-Diable, Miracle of Notre-Dame
Rodogune, by Corneille
Roger-la-honte, by J. Mary

and

Roi
Roi
Roi
Roi
Roi

Cerf (Le), by Gozzi
l'argent (Le), by Milliet
de Rome (Le), by Pouvillon
s'amuse (Le), by Hugo
sans couronne (Le), by St. Georges

de

de

Bouhélier

Roi sans royaume (Le), by Decourcelle
Roi Soleil (Le), by Bernède

XXXVI
X
XXXV
VI
XXX

Sainte-Hélène, by Mme. Séverine
Saint-Ignace d'Antioch, Miracle of NotreDame
Saint Julien l'hospitalier, by Flaubert
Sais (Le), by Mme Ollognier

c
c

A
c

2
o
4
5
2

D

1

D

1

c

B

XIV

c
A

4

C

A

7

V

XXXIII

D
B
D
B
B

XXV

XIII

III

XVIII

A

VIII
VIII

A
A

XXXIII

XIX

1

E

XXXIII
VII
XIX

Rolande, by de Gramont
XXII
XXVIII
Roman d'Elise (Le), by Richard
Roman d'une Conspiration (Le), by
VIII
Fournier and Carré
XXIX
Romeo and Juliet, by Shakespeare
rIV
Rosemonde, by Rucellaï
VIII
Rosse, tant at plus, by Mustière
Route d'Emeraude (La), by Demolder and
XXII
Richepin
XIX
Ruy-Blas, by Hugo

Saint-Alexis, Miracle of Notre-Dame

c

B

5

4
1
3

4
1
1

C

2

C
D

2

A

2

B
C

1

6

A

2

A

6

G

III

A

XX
XIX
XXIV

A
E

A

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.

XVI

Sakuntala, by Kalidasa
and

Salammbo, by Flaubert
Salaminians (The), by Aeschylus
Salome, by Oscar Wilde
Samson, by Voltaire
Samson, by Bernstein
Samson et Dalila, by Saint-Saens
Sang-brul6 (La), by Bouvier
Sapho, by Gounod
Sapho, by Daudet
S. A. R., by Chancel
Sardanapalus, by Byron
Saul, by Alfieri
Saul, by Gide
Scandal e (Le), by Bataille
Schism of England (The), by Calderon
Sculpteur de Masques (Le), by Cromelynck
Scythes (Les), by Voltaire
Second Faust (The), by Goethe
Secret de Gilberte (Le), by Massiac
Secret de la Terreuse (Le), by Busnach
Secret Vengeance for Secret Outrage, by
Calderon
Semele, by Aeschylus
Semiramis, by Manfredi
Semiramis, by Crebillon
Semiramis, by Voltaire
Semiramide riconosciuta, by Metastasio
Serenade

(La), by

J.

307

and

Jullien

Serge Panine, by Ohnet
Serpent Woman (The), by Gozzi
Sertorius, by Corneille
Seven Against Thebes, by Aeschylus
Seven Princesses (The), by Maeterlinck
Severo Torelli, by Coppee
Shepherd King (The), by Metastasio
Sherlock Holmes, by Conan Doyle
Shepherds (The), by Sophocles
Sieba, by Manzotti
Sigurd, by Reyer
Simone, by Brieux
Simon, l'enf ant trouve, by Jonathan
Singer (The), anonymous Chinese drama

XXXV

VIII

B
C
B

XXV
XV

D

VI
XXII
XVII
XXVI
XXXIII
XXII
XX
VI

XM

XVI
XXXIV
XV

XXVI
XXIX
IX
XXVII
XXXIII
XXV

XIII

XXVI

XXVI
XIX

XXIV
XXXII
XXV
XXV

C

A
C

D

A
B

A
D
B
B
B

c

A
D
B
B

D
B
B
C
B

XIII

A

XXVII
XXVIII

D
C
C

III

4

A
A

A

XXXVI

2

D
B

xxxm
XX

3

8
1

3

B

B
4
1

VI

A

1

XXV

B
C
D

3

XXVIII
XXVII

III
III

A
A

6
6
1

168

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

IX

Sinon, by Sophocles
Sire, by Lavedan
Siroes, by Metastasio
Sir Thomas Wyat, by Webster
Smilis, by Aicard

XXVII
XXXIII
XXX

XXI
and

Soeurette, by Borteau-Loti
Son Excellence Eugene, by Zola
Sons of Pandou (The), by Radjasekhara
Sophonisbe, by Trissino
"
by Mairet
by Alfieri
Sorciere (La), by Sardou
Souris (La), by Pailleron
Sphinx (The), by Aeschylus
Statue (The), by Radjasekhara
Stella, by Goethe
Story of Yayati (The), by Roudradeva
Suppliants (The), by Aeschylus
Suppliants (The), by Euripides
Suzette, by Brieux
Surcouf, by Planquette
Surena, by Corneille

XXV
XXV
XXX

III

XX
XX
XX

XXIV

XIV

XI
XXIV
XXV

XXIX

I

I

XXIV
XXIV
XXXII

D
B

B
B

l
7
2

A
c
c
c
A

2

B
B
B
B

3

4
7
1
5

3
3
1

A

4

B
D

3

B

6

A
A
A
A
A
A

1

2
1

2

7
5

3

P

XXXII

Tancrede, by Voltaire
and

II

Tanis et Zelide, by Voltaire
Tannhaeuser, by Wagner
Tartarin, by Daudet
Taverne des Trabans (La), by ErckmannChatrian
Tchitra Yadjgna, by Vedanyatha
Vatchespati
Telephus, by Euripides
Telephus, by Aeschylus
Telephus, by Sophocles
Tempest (The), by Shakespeare
Tenailles (Les), by Hervieu
Temptation of Saint Anthony (The), by

XXIV
XXII

Tereus, by Sophocles
Terre (La), by Zola

III

Flaubert

VI

A

XXXI

B
B
B
B
B
C

I

XIX
XIX

III

XXV

XXII

XIII

1

2
2

B

XXIX

XXX

and

A
A
A
A

3
1

3
1
1

1
1

B
B
C

5

B

1

1

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Terre d'epouvante, by Morel and de Lorde
Teucer, by Sophocles
Thamiras, by Sophocles
Themistocles, by Metastasio
Theodora, by Sardou
Theodore, by Corneille
Therese Raquin, by Zola
and

Thermidor, by Sardou
Theseus, by Euripides
Thr acians (The), by Aeschylus
Three Punishments in One, by Calderon
Thyestes, by Seneca
Thvestes in Sicyon, by Sophocles
Thyestes II, by Sophocles
Timoleon, by Alfieri
Timon of Athens, by Shakespeare
'Tis Pity She's a Whore, by Ford
Titan, by Jean-Paul Richer
Tjte et Berenice, by Corneille
Toilers of the Sea, by Hugo
and

Torquemada, by Hugo
Torrent (Le), by Donnay
Torrismond, by Tasso
Tosca (La), by Sardou
Trains de luxe (Les), by Hermant
Trente ans ou la vie d'un joueur, by
Ducange
Tribun (Le), by Bourget
Tjribut de Zamora (Le), by Gounod
Trisan and Isolde, by Wagner
Triumvirat (Le), by Voltaire
Troilus, by Aeschylus
Troilus and Cressida, by Shakespeare
Troades (The), by Euripides
by Seneca
Troyens (Les), by Berlioz

and

VI

VI
XXXI
XX

XXXIII

XX
XXXIV
XV

VIII
IX

XVI

B

3

A
A

2
2
3

D

A
A
A

4
1
1

D

1

B
B

1

2

XIII

A

2

1VI

C
C
D

2

B

3

XXXV
XXX

XXVI
XVIII

XX
XXIV
-IX

XXIII
XIX

XXV

A

A
D

A

C

1
1

2
7
2

3
1

XVIII
XXI
XXIV

A

2

D

2

B

6

XXII
XXVII
XXIV

C
D

2

XXXVI
V
XXXVI
XXXVI

I

Tunic Confronted (The), by Tchang-kouepin
Turandot, by Gozzi

4

A

XXIV

Tullia, by Martelli

A
c

XIII
XIII

XXV

and

169

XX
XXX

A
C

A
A

2
3
3
3
1

C

A
A
B
B
C

1
1
1

3
2

III

A

1

XI

C

1

170

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

Twenty-fourth
of February H The), by
Werner
Two foscari (The), by Byron
Two Gentlemen of Verona, by Shakespeare
Two Noble Kinsmen The), by Beaumont
and Fletcher

XIX

B

'

III

A

XIV

1

1

D

'

XIV

,

C

U
Ubu-Roi, by Jarry
XXX
Ulysses Furens, by Sophocles
XI
Un ange, by Capus
XXII
Un divorce, by Moreau
XXXII
Un drôle, by Yves Guyot
XXV
Une famille au temps de Luther, by
Delavigne
XIII
Une femme passa, by Coo'us
XTV
Une nuit de Cléopâtre, by Gautier and V.
Masse
XXII
and

Un patriote, by Dartois
Un voyage de noces, by Tiercelin

XXIV
XXIII

■

c
C
C

A

3
2
1

C

1

A

1

D

A

5

B

4

B

4

A

2

D

4

B

3

D

1

A

5

C

2

XXVIII

A

2

III

C

XXV

•

Valentinian, by Beaumont and Fletcher
Varennes, by Lenôtre and Lavedan
Vautrin, by Balzac
Veine (La), by Capus
Venisamhara, by Bhatta Narayana
Ventre de Paris (Le), by Zola
Veuve joyeuse (La), by Meilhac, Leon and
Stein
Vicomtesse Alice (La), by Se ond
Vidocq, by Bergerat
Victory of Arjuna (The), by Cantchana

XXXIII
XXIV

XXVI
XXV

III

XXXIII
V

Atcharya
IX
Victory of Pradyoumna (The), by Samara
Dikchita

Vieil homme (Le), by Porto-Riche
Vielle histoire, by J. Jullien
Vie publique (La), by Fabre
Vierge (La), by Vallette
Vierge folle (La), by Bataille
Virgin Martyr (The), by Massinger
Vittoria Corombona, by Webster

A

3

D

C

2

XXIX
XIV
XXVII

A

2

XXXII

A

XXX

XXV
XX
XV

B

A
C

B

2
2
1

4
9

D

A

1

INDEX OF PLAYS, NOVELS, ETC.
Vive le roi! by Ryner
Voix de sang (La), by Mme Rachilde
Voleur (Le), by Bernstein

XX v

XIX
XXXIII

171

A

4

G

3

A

3

W
Waiting- Women (The), by Aeschylus
Wallenstein, by Schiller
War of the Worlds (The), by Wells
Weavers of Nets (The), by Aeschylus
Weavers of Silesia (The), by Hauptmann

Werner, by Byron
Werther, by Goethe
Wild Duck (The), by Ibsen
William Tell, by Schiller

and

XX
XXX

VI
XVI

VIII

XXVII
XXXIV
XVII

A
A
A
A
B
C
B

2
3
2
1

2

C

1

III

B
B

2
6

XXV

A

1

VIII

Winter's Tale (A), by Shakespeare
Women of Colchis, by Sophocles
Women of Scyros, by Sophocles
Wool-Carders (The), by Aeschylus
Worst is not Always Certain (The), by
Calderon

XXXII

A

1

Xoanephores (The), by Sophocles

VI

A

2

Zaire, by Voltaire

XXXII
XXVIII

A

2

IV

A

Zeim, by Gozzi
Zenobia, by Metastasio
Zoe Chien-chien, by Mathey

Zulime, by Voltaire

XXV

XI
XXXI

XXV

XXIV.

C

A

2
1

B
C

2

B

4

2

ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF AUTHORS
A
Abeille : Lyncée
XXIII
Achaeus : Œdipus
XVIII
Adam (Paul): L'Automne
VIII
a
Les Mouettes
XXIII
Adam de la Halle: Le Jeu de la Feuillée
VII
" .
Le Jeu de Robin et cie

Marion

X

III

Adenis : Les Révoltés
Aeschylus: The Suppliants
a
The Heraclidae
a
The Eumenides
tt
The Eleusinians
t<
Danae
<
The Mysians
t
The Phrygians
t
The Propompes
t
The Epigones
t
The Argives
t
The Perrhoebides
t
t
t
<

t
t
t

I
I
I

I

I
I

I

I

III
III
III

III
III
III
III

Ixion

The Nereids
Penelope
Les Joueurs d'osselets
and

The Choephores

Atalanta

Prometheus Bound

VII

The Persians
The Myrmidons
The Salaminians
The Guests
Nemea

B

?

A
c
A
A
A
A
A
A

1

8
1

5
1

]

J
2

B
B
B

3

C

1

A
A

A
A
A

2

4
1

]
5
5
7

B

2

B

2

B

A

VII

C
C

1

B

VI
VI
VI

A
A

IX

A

VII
H3

3

IV
IV
V

and

B

A

C
B

1
1
1

2

TUlRTY-SlX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

174

IX
IX
IX
IX
IX
IX

chylus: The Phorcides
"
Phineus
"
Memnon
"
Glaucus Pontius
"
Prometheus
"
Prometheus Unbound

"
"
"
"
"
"
"

"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"

"

"
"
"
"
"

X
X
X

Orithyie

Europa
The Carians
The Sphinx
Palamede
Philoctetes
The Judgment of Arms
The Heliades
Seven Against Thebes
Agamemnon
The Weavers of Nets
Athamas
The Thracians

XI
XI

XII
XII
XIII
XIII
XV

XVI
XVI
XVI

XVII

Semele

XVIII
XVIII

CEdipus
Alcmene
Telephus
The Priestesses
Polydectes
The Waiting-Women
The Phoenissae
Iphigenia
Hypsipyle
The Danaides

XIX
XIX
XIX
XX
XX

XXIII
XXIII
XXIII

XXVI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXIV
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXI

Laius

The Aedonians
Pentheus
The Bassarides
The Wool-Carders
Ajax Locrian
The Nurses
The Eumenides
Niobe

Troilus

Penthesilea
The Death of Achilles
Psychostase
ml: Smilis
and

XXV

B
B
B
B

c

2
2
2
2
1

D

1

B
C

3

A
A
A
A

1

C

A
A
A
A
A
B
B

A

D
B
C

F
A
A
A

1

2
1
1
1
1

1
2
1

2
2
2
3
1

B
B

3

D

1

A
A
A
A
B
B

A
A
A

2

1

i

1
1

3
4
2
1
1

C
C

C

A

2

C

4

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Aicard: La Legende du Coeur
Alamanni: Antigone
Alfieri: The Conspiracy of the Pazzi
"
Polynice

XXV
XX

VIII
XIII
XIII
XIII

Saul

Agis

II

Philippe

"
"
•'

"
"
"

175

and

XIV
XXVI
XV

Octavia
Merope
Antigone
Sophonisbe

XIX

XX
XX
XXV

Rosemonde

XXVI

Myrrha

XXX
XXX

Timoleon
Brutus
"
Marie Stuart
"
Don Garzia
"
Orostes
Amigues: La Comtesse Fredegonde
Ancey: L'Ecole des veufs
Andersen: Le Compagnon de voyage
Anguillara: CEdipus
Annunzio (d'): La Citta morta
Aretin (1') : Horace
Armand (Mme): Les Fils de Jahel
Arnold: Le rime d'un autre
Arnould : Le Mari
"
La Belle aux cheveux d'or
Arnyvelde: La Courtisane
Artois (d'): La Fermiere
Athis: Le pere Chasselas

II

XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIV
XXV

XXVI
XI

XVIII
XXVI

Madame Caverlet
Le Mariage d'Olympe
Aurel: LTnsociale

B
B

A
A

A
A
C

A
B
B
B

A

1

3
2
1

3
3
5
2
1

2
2
3
2
7

3
2
1

IV

A

VIII

A

1

C

1

XXXIII

XXV

XVII

xxvn
XXXV

and

"
"

A

2

XXIV

XXIII

Auge de Lassus: La Conspiration de gen
eral Malet
Augier: Diane

D
D
B
B
B
B

1

3

C
B
B
D
C
C
B
C

XX

Attilius: Electra

D

A
A
A

XXI
XXXIII
XXVII
XXVII
XXXVI

A
A
B
B

2
5
2
2
1

3
6

1

2
1

8

B
Balzac: Cesar Birotteau
"
La cousine Bette

"

Vautrin

VI
XXII
XXVI

B
C
D

1
1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

176

XXX

Balsac: Les Illusions perdues
Barbier: Indigne
Barlatier : La Morte
Basset: Les Grands
Bataille: L'Enchantement
"
Maman Colibri
"
La Vierge folle
Le Scandale
Beaubourg: L'Image
"
Dieu ou pas Dieu
Beaumont: The Two Noble Kinsmen
"
Valentinian
Becque: Les Corbeaux
Bell : Catharine la Bâtarde
Bergerat: Vidocq
"
Myrane
''
Flore de Frileuse
Berlioz: Les Troyens

A

XXIV
XXiX
XIV
XXXIII
VII
XXXIII

4
1

B

9

B
B

2

A
c

8
3

D

1

XXV

B
B

7

I

B
B

XX
XXIV

XXVIII
XXV

XXXIII
XXV

XIX
XXII

XXV
XXV

XXXIII

XXV

XXVII

III
III

X

Mahaviracharita
Later Life of Rama
Bilhaud: La Courtisane de Corinth
Biollay: M. Bute
"
Les Angles du divorce
Bisson: Nick Carter
La Femme X
Bizet: L'Arlésienne
Blavet: Les Fils de Porthos
Bodel (Jean): Le Jeu de Saint- Nicholas

A
c

8
3

4

XXVII

and

B

1

D
B

III

Berton: La Rencontre
Lena
Bertrand: Jack the Ripper
Bhatta Narayana: Venisamhara
Bhavabuti: Malati and Madhava
"

XXXIII
XIV
XXII

XXV
XXXIV

Bernard: Mon ami Teaciy
Bernard (Tristan): Le Danseur inconnu
Bernard (C. de): Gerfaut
Bernede: Le Roi Soleil
Bernhardt (Sarah): L'Aveu
Bernstein: Israel
La Griffe
"
Le Bercail
"
Après moi
"
Le Voleur

"

B

XXIV

and

c

V

XXIV
X

XXXV

III

c

A
A

2

C

2

c

4

E

A
c
D

3
4
1

A
c

4

B

4

B

A
c
A

3

7
5
1

3

c

2

B

5

XXVII
XXII

A

II

7

6

A

XXIV

1

3

c

XVI
XXVIII

III

2

3

E
C

A

A
A

1

5
5

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Bois (G.): Edith
Bois (J.): La Furie
Boissy: Alceste
Bannetain: L'Opium
Borteau-Lotti : Soeurette
Bourget: Le Disciple
"
La Barricade
"
Mensonges
"
Le Tribun

V

XXII
XXI
XXII
XXV

III

"
"

L'Emigré
Le Divorce
Bouvier: La Dame au Domino rose
"
La Sang-brulé
"
"

Malheur aux pauvres
La grande Iza

Boyer: Jephtha
Brieux: Maternité
"
Les Avariés
"
Simone
"
La Petite Amie
Suzette
Buchanan: Alceste

Jephtha
Buet: Le Prêtre
Busnach: Le Secret
Byl: L'Age Critique

de

177

XXIV
XXVII
XXVII
XXVIII
XXVIII

XVIII

XXVI
XXXII
XXXIII

XXIII

VI
XVII
XXVII
XXVIII
XXXII
XXI

XXIII

la Terreuse

Byron: The Two Foscari
' '
Sarda'napalus
'
Marino Faliero
'
The Deformed Transformed
Cain
'
Heaven and Earth
'
Werner
"
Manfred

III

XXXIII

XXV

III
VI
VI

IX

XIII

XXIV
XXVII
XXXIV

c

A
A
c
c

A
A
B
D

A
D
C

c
c

B

A
D
C
D

A
A
A
A
A
B
C

A
A
C
D

A
A

5
1

2
7

8
7
7

2
1
1
1
3

2
2
1

2
6
2
3
1

2
1

4
3
1

2
1

3
1
1

C

A

1

C
Caillavet

Papa
Le Coeur a ses raisons
"
L'Ane de Buridan
"
La Montansier
Cain: Les Révoltés
Calderon: The Alcalde of Zalamea
"
Love After Death
"
Devotion to the Cross
"
Louis Perez of Galicia

"

12

(de)

:

XIV

XIV
XXIV
XXV

III
III
III
V

V

B
D
B

6

C

3

A

A
A
A
A

1

5

3
6

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

178

Calderon: Three Punishments in One
"
The Schism of England
The Constant Prince
"
Secret Vengeance for Secret
Outrage
"
The Physician of His Honor
"
His Own Gaoler
"
Fortune and Misfortune of a
Name
The Worst is Not Always Cer
tain
"
Life is a Dream
Cantchana Atcharya: The Victory of Arjuna
Capus: Un Ange

L'Attentat
La Veine

Carcinus: CEdipus
Carre: La Courtisane de Corinth
"
La Roman d'une Conspiration
Cervantes: Don Quixote
Caesar: CEdipus
Chabrihan (Comtesse de): Pierre Pascal
Chancel: S. A. R.
Charton: Devant l'ennemi
Chatrian: La Nuit de Saint- Jean

Myrtille
L'Ami Fritz

Les Rantzau
La Taverne des Trabans
Madame Therese
Chateaubriand: Les Martyrs
Rene

Chenier (M.

"

J.):

Electre
CEdipus

Cicero (Q.): Electra
Cienfuegos: Idomenee
Clairian: Jack the Ripper
Clairville: Madame Margot
Claretie: Le Prince Zilah
Claudel: Partage de midi
Cliquet: C'est la loi
Coedes: Le Crime de Maisons-Alfort
Coolus: Le Risque
"
Une femme passa

XIII

B
B

1

XV
XX

A

4

XXV
XXV

D
D

1

B

6

XXIX

B

6

XXXII

A

1

B

2

C

2

C

2

XXIX

XIII

IX
XXII
XXIV
XXV

XVIII

III

VIII

II

XVIII

XV
XX

XXIV
XXIV
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX
XXXI
XXXIV

IV

XVIII
IV

XXIII

A
A
A
B

A
A
A
A
B

A
A
A

A
A
A
A
A

1

7
3
1
5

2
1
1

3
8
7

2
2
3
3
4
2

B

A
A

A

1
1
1

A

2

VIII

A

2

XV
XXV

A

B

3

B

8

XIV
XIV

A

4

III

XXVII

III

B

A
D

7

1

1

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Coolus: Les Passagères
"
Antoinette Sabrier
Coeur a Coeur
"
Les Bleus de l'amour

4x7

"

"

Severo

Corneille
tt

a
a
a
a
a
a
tt
tt

a
a
a
a
tt

a
a
tt
tt

u
tt

tt

a

(P.):

tt
M

"
"
"

Idoménée

Rhadamiste et Zénobie
Semiramis
Crémieux: La Charbonnière
Crichna Cavi: The Death of oansa

4

1

B

1

B
B
B
B
B
B

2

XX

XX
XX

XXI

XXIII

XXIV
XXIV- XXIV
XXIV

XXIV
XXV

and

2

2

A

XX
XX
XX

Médée

3

VIII
XIII

XVIII

d'or

B
D
D

2

4

XVIII

La Conquête de la Toison

A

3

6

A
A

XVII

Agésilas
Suréna
Don Sanche

C

6

II
III
V

Attila

Atrée et Thyeste

c
c

XXVII

Torelli

Coypel: Alceste
Crebillon: Electre

XXV

XXI
XXV

Andromède
Pompée
Nicomède
Cinna
Rodogune
Psyché
Œdipe
Héraclius
Polyeucte
Othon
Pulchérie
Tite et Bérénice
Sertorius
Théodore
Pertharite
Horace

Le Comte d'Essex
Le Festin de Pierre

B

XXVIII
XXXII

— 28

Le Cid
Corneille: Clitandre
Corneille (T.): : Ariane

XXIV

XXIV

Madame de Maintenon
Les Jacobites

Coppée:

179

XXIX
XXXIII
VI
XXIV
XXIV
XXXI
XXI
IV

XIII

XXIII

XXV
XXVI

XXI

XIII

c

E

A

1

1

3
3
3
3

D

D
B

A

A

A
A
B

A
B
D
D

2
B

4
5
5
6
1
1
1
1
1

B

7

B

2

B

2

A
A

A
A
c
A
D

C

1

1

2
2
2
1
1

1

XXIV

XXVI
XIV
XXXVI

1

Croisset: Le Circuit
Cromelynck: Le Sculpteur de Masques
Curel (de): Les Fossiles
"
La Fille sauvage

B C C

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

180

D

-

III

D

z
4

XX

B C B B B

A

XXV
XXV

C B

IX

1

VIII

1

XXV

XXVI
XXIV
XXI
XVIII
XXXII
XIV
XXV
XXV

XXI

4 1 2 4 1 3 1 4
1

2
6

6 7

1
1

D

A
A
A

A

1

D

A

1

XXV

A

2 7

XXIX
XIV
XXIX
XXII
XXI
XXI
XXIV
XXXIII

A
A
A

1

XIII

4 1

XXXIII

1

III

1

XXX

A
B B C D

VIII

XXVII

A
A
A

B

XXII
XXII
XXIV

C

XVII

B C C

XV

D C B

XXIII
VI

2 8 5 3 1 4

XXXV

1

Dorat: Alceste

.

"

Le Torrent
Paraitre

,"

'•'

Dalayrac: Raoul de Crequi
Dalliere: La Mission de Jeanne d'Arc
Danceny: L'Or
Darlay: La Petite Caporale
"
Les Aventures de Gavroche
Dartois: Un Patriote
Daudet: Tartarin
"
La Lutte pour la vie
"
Port-Tarascon
"
L'Evangeliste
Sapho
"
L'Arlesienne
L'Obstacle
"
Numa Roumestan
"
La Petite Paroisse
Decourcelle: Le Roy sans royaume
L'As de trefle
"
Les cinq doigts de Birouk
Delahaye: La Declassee
Delacour: La Criminelle
Delavigne: Une farille au temps de Luther
Delibes: Lakme
Delpit: Les Maucroix
"
Mile, de Bressier
Demolder: La Route d'emeraude
Dennery: Martyre
"
Le petit Jacques
Descaves: L' Attentat
Desnard: La Degringolade
Devore: Page blanche
"
La Sonscience de l'enfant
Diaz: Benvenuto
Dickens: Great Expectations
Diogenes: CEdipus
Dolce: Marianne
Donnay: L' Autre Danger

B E

D

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Dornay:

Gavroche
Fiacre No. 13.
"
Les Foulards-rouges
Dostoievsky: Crime and Punishment
Doyle: Sherlock Holmes
Ducange : Trente ans ou la vie d'un joueur
Ducis: Œdipe

"

Abufar

"

"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"

XXXIII
XXXIII

B
B

XXXIV

A

XXXV

III

XXII

XVIII
XVIII

III

Dumas père: Monte-Cristo
"
Don Juan
Dumas fils: L'Etrangère

"
"
"

181

V

and

Le Fils naturel
Le Père prodigue
Le Divorce de Sarah Moore
La Question d'argent

Francillon
La Princesse Georges
Diane de Lys
La Femme de Claude
L'Affaire Clemenceau

Denise
La Dame aux camelias
M. Alphonse
La Princesse de Bagdad
Dumay: La petite Milliardaire
Dumur: Le Maquignon
"
Rembrandt
Duval: L'Article 301

III

XXV

XII
XIV
XXI
XXIV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV

XXVII
XXVII
XXVII
XXXII
XXIV

III

VII
XXIV

c
c

A
B
B
B
B
B
B
B

A
A
B
B

c
c

D
B
B
B

A
A
A

2
2
3
2
1
1

4
7
3
1

2
7
2
3
3
7
1

3
6
7
1
7
1

D

c

E
Edmond (C): La Bucheronne
Eekhoud: Kermesse rouge
Elzéar: Jack Tempête
Emile-Michelet: Le Pèlerin d'amour
Erckmann: La Nuit de Saint- Jean

"

"
"
"

L'Ami Fritz
Myrtille

Les Rantzau
La Taverne des Trabans
Madame Thérèse
Ernault: La Croisade des enfantelets
francs
"
La tentation de vivre
Euripides: The Heraclidae

XXIV

III

XXIV
XXVII
XXIV
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX

VII

XVI

I

A
A

A
B

A
A
A
A

A
A

8
8
8
7
7
2
2
3
3
4

B

A
A

2
1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

182

Euripides:
tt

u
tt
tt

a
a
a
a
a
tt
tt

a
tt
tt
tt

a
a

:

The Suppliants
Danae
The Cretans

I

I
I
I
I
I

Augeo^.

Alope
Telephus
Andromeda
Antiope
Dictys
Hecuba

II

II
II

III
III
III

Ixion
Phrixus
Electra

IV
VI

Archelaus
Peleus
Theseus
(Enomaus
Rhesus

VII
IX

IX
IX
and

tt

a
tt

a
a
tt

a
a
tt
tt
tt

Helen
Polyidus
Women of Scyros
Palamede
and

Philoctetes
The Phoenissae
Phoenix
Heracles Mainomenos
Ino
Phaeton
The Peliades

a
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt

a
a
ft

a

Ion
Cresphontes
Aegeus
Alexander
Iphigenia in Tauris
Protesilas
Antigone
Alceste
Andromache
Iphigenia in Aulis
Erechtheus
Melanippe
Hypsipyle

XI
XI
XXXIII

XII
XIII
XIV
XVI
XVI

and
tt

XXXVI
X
XI

XVII
XVII
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX

XIX
XIX
XX
XX
XXI

XXI
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII
XXIII

A

2

B

2

B
B
B
B

2

A

2
2
8

B

1

B

2

A
A

2
5

B

4

C
C
D
D
D
C
C

1

A

A
C

c

1
1
1

2
1
1

2
3

c

2

B

3

A
A
A
A
A
C

1
1
1
1

4

E
B

1

B
B

1

2

C
C

2

1

A
A
A

2

D

1

A

A
B
B

3
1

1

i

1

2

INDEX OF AUTHORS
XXV
XXV
XXV
XXVI
XXVI

Euripedes:
"

"
"
"
"
"
Ezekiel:

183

Medea
Andromache
Alcmeon
Hippolyte
Eole
Chrysippus
The Cretans
The Bacchantes
Bellerophon
Phaeton
Orestes
Troades (The)
The Exodus of the Hebrews

XXVI
XXVI
XXXI
XXXI
XXXI

XXXIV

XXXVI
XXXI

A
B
B
B

c

D

1
1

4
2
1
1

E

A

B
B

A

A

1

3
5
2
1

A

2

A

3

F

XIII

Fabre: La Maison d'argile
"
César Birotteau
"
La Vie publique

XX

XXVIII
and I

Fall: La Divorcée
Fauchois:

Beethoven

Rivoli

L'Exode
Ferrier: La Cornette
Feuillet: Chamillac
Fèvre: En Detresse
Feydeau: Le Circuit
Flaubert: Salammbô
"
Saint Julien l'hospitallier
"
Hérodias
"
The Temptation of St. Anthony
"
Madame Bovary
Fleischmann: La Fille a Guillotin
Fiers (de): Papa
"
La Cœur a ses raisons
"
L'Ane de Buridan
"
La Montansier
Fletcher: The Two Noble Kinsmen
"
Valentinian
Fonson: Le Mariage de Mlle. Beulemans
Ford: Tis Pity She's a Whore
"
The Broken Heart
"
Perkin Warbeck
"
Love's Sacrifice
Forest: La petite milliardaire

XXX

XXXII
VE
XXV

XXIX
XXI
XXVII
VII
XXIV

VIII

XIX
XXII
XXII
XXV

XXIII
XIV
XIV
XXIV
XXV

XIV
XXXIII
XXIV
XXVI
XXIX
XXX

XXXII
XXXIV

A
A
c
A

4
1
1

2

D

c
A

7
4

D

1

B

5

c
c
B

2
1

E
B
B
C

A
B
D
B

c
c
D

7
3
1

6

3
4

A

8

C

2

A

1

B

A
A

3
.7

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

184

Forest:

L'Homme a deux tetes

Fournier: Le Roman d'une conspiration
Fraisse: Les Champairol
"
Jean Cevenol
Le Mannequin d'osier
"
Les Noces corinthiennes
"
Crainquebille
Franck: Coeur maternel
Fread Amy: L'Impasse
Frondaie: Montmartre
G
Miss
Fanfare
Ganderax:
Garaud: Le Frere d'armes
Gautier: Mademoiselle de Maupin
"
Une nuit de Cleopatre

France:

u
u
tt

"

3

B

3

XXV

XXV

XXI

XVIII

Clavijo
Goetz de Berlichingen
Egmont

I

VI

The Natural Daughter
"
The Second Faust
"
Pandora
"
Iphigenia in Tauris
Stella
"
Werther
Goldoni: Don Juan
Gombaud: Les Danaides
Goncourt (E. and J. de) : Renee Mauperin
"
"
Germinie Lacerteux
Goncourt (E. de) : Les Freres Zemganno

B
D

2

4
4
3
3
1

7
1

5

B

4

A

B

7
2

A

3

C

B
D
D

1

A
A
A

3

C

1

D

1
1

1

III

A

V

C

VIII

B

1

D
C
C
B
B
B
B

3

C

2

C

1

B

X

V
and

E

XXIX
XXVIII

XXIV

and

A
A
A
A

A

XVI
XXVII
IV
XXI
XXII

Faust

c

XXII
XXIV

XX
XXXIV

Gluck: .Alceste
Godard : Jocelyn
u
Dante
Goethe:

XXXIII

B

I

XV

Orbecche

2

A

XXVIII

Gautier (Judith) : La Marchanc
rires
Gavault : La petite Chocolatiere
Geffroy: : L'Apprentie
Geraldy : L'Eclaboussure
Gide: Saul
Gilkin: Etudiants russes

0

VIII

XXIX
XXXIII
XXXIII

and

Giraldi:

XXXIII

VII
IX
XVII
XIX
XXV

XXXIV
V

XXIII
XVII
XXII
XXI

8

c

A

1

2
6

3

INDEX OF AUTHORS

XVI
IX
XXIV
XXXIII
XI

Goncourt (E. de) : La Fille Elisa
Gorsee (de) : La Petite Caporale
Gounod: Le Tribut de Zamora
Sapho
Gozzi: Turandot

"
"
"

XV

Zobeide

XVIII
XIX
XXVIII

Loves of the Three Oranges
The Blue Monster

*'

Zeim

"
"
"

XXXIII

The Serpent Woman
Le Corbeau

XXXIII

XVIII

Le Roi Cerf
Grabbe: Don Juan
Gramont (de): Rolande
"
Lucienne

Grangeneuve: Amhra
Jarnac
Gravier:
Gregory Nazianzen (Saint):

fering

V

XXII

XXV

III

Christ Suf-

and
ivers
Banque de 1'Univers

Grenet-Dancourt: La
Gretry: Richard Coeur-de-Lion

and

Grillet: Les Pierrots

XXIII
XX

XXXI
XVII

X
XXXV

XXXIII

XXV

Guiches: Les Quarts d'heure
Guillard:
Guinon:
Guiraud:

185

and

Electra

XXVII
IV
XXV

A
D

A
D

c

1

1

B

A
A

D
B
C

A
A
B

A
A
A

1

3
1
1
1
6

6
2
1

2

D

1

B
C

4

A
A

XXVIII

A

Hermant:

XXIV

XXV

1

2

Halevy: L'Abbe Constantin
Harshadeva (Sri): The Necklace
Hardy: Alceste
Hauptmann: The Weavers of Silesia
Heine: Almanzor
Hennique: Amour

xxrv

3

G

XXIV

XXVIII

Le Poussin
Guitry (S.): Petite Hollande
Guyot (Yves): Un drole
Gyp: Le Friquet

2

B
D

C
D
B
C
B

Decadence

2

2
1
1
1

2
6
1

6

H

"

"

Jarnac
Trains de luxe

Les Jacobines
Herold: Le Cor fleuri
Hervieu: Le Reveil

"

La Loi de Phomme

XXIV

XXI

VIII

XXIX

XV

XXIII
XXV

XXIV
XXI
XXI

2

D

3

B

2

A
A
A
B
B
C
B
C
C

1

4
1

6
6
4
3
2
3

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

186

Hervieu:

"
"
"

Le Course du flambeau
Le Dedale

and

Les Tenailles
Connais-toi

L'Enigme
Hirsch: En greve

Hornung: Raffles
Hroswitha: Abraham
Hugo: Mangeront-ils

"

XXV
XXV
XXV
XXV

C
C
C

2

D

1

V

XX

I

?

"

"

Toilers of the Sea

"

E
A

XXIV

Lucrece Borgia
XIX B 1, XIX D,
Les Jumeaux

"

XXI

XXIV

XXIV

and

XXIII

B

VI
XXXII
VII

and

1

and

XXXV

and

XXIV
XIX
XXIV

IX

Ruy-Blas
Hernani

XX A

Torquemada

La Esmeralda
Marie Tudor
Marion Delorme

1

XIX i
XXltl
XIX
XXIV
XIX

and
and

XXIV
XIX

and

XXVII

and

XIX

Le Roi s'amuse

XIX

Les Burgraves
Ninety-Three
Angelo
Cromwell

Ibsen: An Enemy of the People
"
Hedda Gabler
"
The Master Builder
"
The Wild Duck
"
Ghosts
"
Rosmersholm
"
The Lady From the Sea
Icres: Les Bouchers

XXIII
XXV
XXX

-

V
XVI

XVII
XVII
XVIII

XXXIV

XXIV

III

A
A

L2
1

3
7

D

A
A

3

C

3

A

A
D

A

3
2

2
7

A

3

A

3

A

11

B

3

B

4

A
F
A

C

4
1

3
1

A

3

c
A

3

A
c
B
B
B

A

1
1

3
8
8

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Jarry: Ubu-roi
Jeoffrin: La Montansier

XXX
XXV

Simon l'enfant trouve
"
Pierre Vaux
Joncières (de): Le Chevalier Jean
Josz: Le Maquignon
" Rembrandt
Jullien: Le Maitre

-

"

L'Echéance
Vielle histoire

Kalidasa:

Sakuntala

A

XXI
XXXII

D
C

III

A

VII

XIII
XIII

La Mer
La Sérénade

"

c
c

III

Jonathan:

"

187

XXV
XXV

,

D
B
D
C
C

3
6
1

2
1
1

3
8
2

XXVII

A

XVI

C

XXIV

D

2

VIII

A

1

III

B

3

K
"

Agnimitra and Malavika
"
The Hero and the Nymph
Kampf: Le Grand Soir

Kouan-han-king:
oun-go

and

XXXV
XXXV

The Resentment of TeT

Li

Labiche: L'Affaire de la rue de Lourcine
Lagrange-Chancel : Alceste
Lamothe: Œdipus
Laporte: L'Homme de proie
Laumann: Le Cœur revelateur
Lavedan: Le Duel
"
Varennes
"
Les Quarts d'heure

"

Le Marquis de Priola
Sire
Léautaud: Le Petit Ami
Leblanc: Arsène Lupin
Lefebvre: La Femme de demain
Lefèvre: L'Homme de proie
Lemaire: Le Mariage d'André
Lemaitre: La Massière
"
Le Depute Leveau
"
Révoltée
Lemierre: Idoméncée
"
Hypermnestre

and

XVI
XXI

XVIII
X

XXXIV

XIII

XXIV

XXV

XXVII
XXVII
XXVII

A
A
A
D

A
A
B
C

A
A
B

XXVI

A

XXV
X

B
D
B
B
B
C

V

XVIII
XIV
XXV
XXV

XXIII

XXIII

A

A
B

3
1
1

2
3
1

3
4
1
1

7
1

9

2
1
1

3
4
2
3

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

188

Le Droit au bonheur
Le Possédé
Lenéru (Mme.): Les Affranchis
Léon: La Veuve joyeuse
"
La Divorcée
Iienôtre: Varennes
Leroux: Les Lys
Lessing: Damon
Emilia Galotti
"
Miss Sara Sampson
Linant: Conte de Noël
Livet: Nick Carter
Longepierre: Electre
Lope de Vega: The Labors of Jacob
"
El mejor alcalde el Rey
"
Fontovejune
Discovery of the New

Lemonnier:

"

World

The Abduction of Helen
Aimer sans savoir qui
and

"
"

Nina

de

Plata

The Mill
The Gardener's Dog

Lorde (de): L'Idiot
"
Terre d'épouvante
Loti: Ramuntcho
Louys: Aphrodite
Loyson: L'Apôtre
Lucas: Alceste
Lyon: Madame l'Amirale

XXI
XXII

XXV

XXVIII
XXXII
XXIV
XXVIII
XIV
XXIV
XXV

XIII

III
IV

XIII

III

VIII

JX
X

XIX
XXXIII
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV

III
VI

XXVIII
XXII
XXVII
XXI
XXVI

C

A
B

2
5
8

A
A

2
2

B
D

3
1

D
C

B

F
c
A
A
A

7

1

1

3

B

2

D
B

1

D

B

1

A
A

5

B

5

A
A
A
A
D

A

B

5

4
4
1
3

2
1
1

M
Maeterlinck: The Princess Maleine
The Blind
"
The Blue Bird
"
Pelleas and Melisande
"
Monna Vanna
"
The Seven Princesses
"
The Intruder
Mafféi: Merope
Mairet: Sophonisbe
Maldagne (Mme.): La Boscotte
Manfredi: Semiramis
Manzoni: Adelghis

VII

VII
IX
XIV
XXXII
XXXVI
XXXVI
XIX
XX

XXXIII
XXVI
V

A
D
D

A
A

3
3
1

B

B
B
B

1

D

3

A
C

1

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Manzoni:

V

The Count of Carmagnola
and

Manzotti: Sieba
Margueritte: Pierrot assassin de sa femme
Marinetti: Poupees electriques
Marot: La Casquette au pere Bugeaud
"
Casse-museau
"
Les Aventures de Gavroche
Marras: La Famille d'Armelles
Mars: Mme. PAmirale
Marthold: L'Ogre

Martelli: Tullia
Mary (J.): Roger-la-honte
"

and

Le Regiment
"
La Bete feroce
Masse: Une nuit de Cleopatra
and

XXVII

XXXV
XXV
XXVI

XXXIII
XXX

III

4

A

8

B

3

D

5

D

2

B
D

c

1

3
2

3

XXII
XXIV
XVII
XXII
XXVII
XX

A

5

XXXII
XXXII
IV

A

XXIV

XXV
XXIX

XXXIII

c

B
B

A
B
C

C

A
B

A
A
A
A
A
B
B

A

A

XXIV

B

V

A

A

XII
XIII

B

XIX
xrv

1

4
2

3
2
5
1

1

2
1
1

4
2
1

a
2
3
3
2
1

6

C

XXIX
V

5

D

XIII

III

and

A

D

XVIII

Alexander
The Desert Isle
Cyrus

)

B

4

XXXIII
XXVII

XIV
XXIX
XXVIII

and

c
c

B
D

VIII

Mercereau: Mon frere
Merimee: Colomba
Messager: Francois les bas-bleus
Metastasio: Cato

Antigone

III

XXV

and

"

VI
XXVIII
XXXIV
XXXIII

XXX

Massenet: Esclarmonde
"
Manon
Massiac: Le secret de Gilberte
Massinger: The Virgin Martyr
"
The Fatal Dowry
"
. The Bondman
"
The Portrait
Mathey: Zoe Chien-Chien
Maujan: Jacques Bonhomme
Maupassant: Pierre et Jean
Mazel: Les Amazones
Meilhac: La Veuve joyeuse
Melitus: CEdipus
Mendes: Glatigny
"
Les Meres ennemies
"
La Reine Fiammette

"
"
"

189

2

C
C

B
B

3
1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

190

Metastasio:

"

"

"

"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"

"
"

XXIII
XXIII
XXIV

Hylermnestre
Demetrius
Semiramide riconosciuta

XXIV

anc

Adrien
Zenobia

Nitetis

The Chinese Hero
The Shepherd King
Siroes
Artaxerxes

Michaud d'Humiac: Le Cœur de Se-hor
Mikhael: Le Cor fleuri
Milliet: Le Roi de l'argent
Milloecker: L'Etudiant pauvre
Mirai: Lydie
Mirbeau:
Les Affaires sont les affaires
Moses (?) : Job
Molière: Don Juan
Montépin: La Policière
Moreau: Madame Margot
"
Le Drapeau
Gerfaut
"
Un divorce
Morel: Terre d'épouvante

"
"

La Fille du député
La Pieuvre
Mortier: Marius vaincu

L'Automne
Lawn-tennis
Mussato: Ezzelino
Musset: Fantasio
"
Lorenzaccio
"
On ne badine pas avec l'amour
"
André del Sarte
Mustière : Rosse, tant et plus

"

XIX
XX
XX
XX
XX

Hypsipyle

JEtius
Méténier: La Casserole

Mourey:

XIX

Demophon
Olympiade
Regulus
Themistocles
Dido
Achilles in Scyros

A

B

A
A

1

1
1

2

B

3

B

3

B
B

3

A

2
5

XXXII
XXIV

B

8

B

1

XXVIII
XXVIII
XXVIII
XXXIII
XXXIII
XXXIII

C
C

2

A
A

XXV

1

B

2

D
D

4

A

XXIV

D
B
B

XXXIII
XXXIII
XXIX
XXVII
XXX
V

XXVII

I

C

III

XXVII

1

2
7
6

3
3

A
A
A

4

B

1

1

3

B
C

VIII

A

2

XXV

C

6

XXIV
XXXII
VI

XXVII
XXXIII

A
A
A
A
C

8
1

4
3
1

XXX

A

3

XXVI
XXX

B

2

D

2

C

1

VIII

B

A

2

C

2

C

4

VIII

II

XVII

XXV

VIII

A

1

2

INDEX OF AUTHORS

191

N
Népoty: L'Oreille fendue
Nicomaque: Œdipus
Nigond:
1812
Nô: Les Carbonari
Nus: Le Mari

XXVII
XVIII

Ohnet: Serge Panine
"
Dernier amour
"
La Comtesse Sarah
"
La Grande Marnière
Ollognier (Mme.): Le Sais

XXV

XIV
XXIX
XXV

XXV
XXV
XXIX
XXIV

Pailleron: La Souris
Paladilhe: Patrie
Diana
Parodi: L'Inflexible
Paton:
Le Divorce de Sarah Moore
Perrault: Bluebeard
"
Le Petit Poucet
"
Peau d'âne
Peter: L'Or
Phrynichus: The Danaides
Picard: La Fugitive
Planquette: Surcouf
Poe: The Purloined Letter
" The Gold Bug
" Berenice
Pohles (de): L'Enfant du Temple
Polti: Compère le Renard
"
Les Cuirs de bœuf
Porto-Riche: Le Vieil Homme
"
Les Malefilâtre
Pouvillon: Le Roi de Rome
Pradon: Electre
"
Regulus
Prevost: Manon Lescaut
Prevost (Jean) : Œdipus
Prevost (M.): Pierre et Thérèse
"
La plus faible

XIV
XXV

XXXIII

A
A
A
A

4

C

1

B

>

6

c

AA
A

XXIV

XI
XI

XXXIV
XX
V

XXVI

XIV

XXV

VII
IV

3

4

D
D

2

D

XXIII
XXI

2

2

VI

III

3

D

A

XXVI

1

B

XXVII
XXI

II

3
1

A
A

A
B
C

A

A
B
B

A
A
A

3
2
2
3
1

3
2
7
1

4
1

B

2

C

7

B

A

1

XX

A

1

XVIII

B

6

XXVIII

A
A
A

XXI

A

XXVII
XXVII

1

2
2

Q

Quinault:

Alceste

1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

192

Rabier: Et ma sceur?
Racine: Esther
"
Alexandre
"
Les Freres ennemis
"
Britannicus
"
Mithridate
"
Iphigenie en Tauride (projected)
"
Berenice
"
Alceste (projected)
"
Andromaque
and

%

"
"

Iphigenie a Aulis
Bajazet
Phedre

Le Roman d'Elise
Richebourg: La petite Mionne
Richepin: Nana-Sahib
"
"

L'Ancien

Le Chien de garde
La Glu
"
La Route d'emeraude
Richepin flls: La Marjolaine
Richter (J. P.): Titan
Riupeiroux: Hypermnestre
Rivoire: Le bon roi Dagobert
"
Mon ami Teddy
Le peche de Marthe
Rochard:
"
La Bete feroce
Rochefort: Electre
Rod: Le Reformateur
Roinard: Les Miroirs
Rolland: Le 14 juillet

V

c
A

2

B

1

XIII

1

XIV
XIV
XX

B

3

D
B

2

B
B

4

XIX
XXI
XXI
XXV

c

•

XXIII

III

XXIV
XXV
XXXV

A
A
A

G
B

A

1

2
1
1
1

1
2
3

8
5

D
B

3

XXXIII

D

2

II

A
A

XXV

and

c

A

XIX
XXIV

Rajasekhara:

"

B

I

XXIV
XXVI
XXXI

Athalie
Rachilde: La Voix du sang
"
Madame la Mort

The Sons of Pandou
The Statue
Raymond: Les Menages de Paris
Regnier (de): La Gardienne
Renauld: Le Crime d'un autre
Reyer: Sigurd
Richard: Boislaurier

XXVIII

XIV
XXVIII

c

D

XIX

A

V

C

XXI

XXI
XXII
XXII

XXIV

XVIII
XXIII

XVIII
XXIV

XXVIII
XXX

A
D

A

A
A

3
1

2

3
2
1
5

6
6

D
B

2

D

2

A
B
C

IV

A

VI
XXV

C
D
B

vm

3

3
7
1
1
1
1

2

INDEX OF AUTHORS

VIII
VII
VIII

Romains: L'Armee dans la Ville
Rostand: L'Aiglon
"
Chantecler
"
Cyrano
Roudradeva: The Story of Yayati
Roupa: The Loves of Krishna
Rouvre (de): Le Mariage d'Andre
Rozier: Le Divorce de Sarah Moore
Rucella'i: Rosemonde
Ryner: Vive le roi!
Rzewuski: Count Witold

XXI
XXIX
XXIV

XVIII
XXI
IV
XX

XXXIV

Sadwell: Don Juan
Sainte-Foix: Alceste

V

Sainte-Marthe: CEdipus
Saint-Georges de Bouhelier: Le Roi sans
couronne
Saint-Pol Roux: La Dame a la faulx
Saint-Saens: Samson et Dalila
"
Ascanio
"

Henri

VIII

Proserpine
"
.
L'Ancetre
Salieri: The Danaides
Samain: Polypheme
Samara Dikchita: The Victory of Pradyoumna
Samson: Marie Stuart
"
Le Crime de Jean Moret
Sand: Le Demon du foyer
Sardou: Thermidor
"
La Tosca
"
Cleopatra
"
La Sorciere
"

"
"
"

Odette

Georgette
Le Crocodile
Fedora
Theodora

L'Affaire des Poisons
Sardou (Andre): L'Etau
Schiller: William Tell

XXI

XVIII
V

XXIV

B
B

2

C

2

A
D

B

2
1
1

A

2

A

4

0

B

2

B

A

A

1
1

C
B

A

XXIV

A

XXIX
XXIV
XXIX

A

XXIII

2

A

XV
XXIV
XXV
XXV
XXIX

C
B
B
B
B

9
2
5
7
6
3
1

2

B

2

XXIV

A

4

XXI

D

2

VIII

XXII
XXIV
XXVII
XXVIII
XXVII
XXIX
XXXIil
XXXIII
XVI

III
and

193

VIII

B

A
A
B

A
A
B
B

A

7
1

4
1
1
1

5
5

2

B

2

D
B
B

6
2

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

194

Schiller:
tt

The Brigands

The Bride of Messina
Marie Stuart
tt
Wallenstein
u
Love and Intrigue
Vicomtesse Alice
La
Second:
Cceur-de-Lion
Richard
Sedaiae:

and

XIV
XXVI

XXXII
V

and

See: Llndiscret
Seneca: The Phcenissse
u

Thyestes
-t . ,
Octavia
a
;
Hercules Furens
a
CEdipus
a
Medea
a
Hercules on CEta
u
Hippolyte
a
The Trojan Women
Severine: Sainte-Helene
Shakespeare: King John
a
The Tempest
a
The Merchant of Venice

u

Richard II
Timon of Athens
Coriolanus

and
a

a
u

King Lear
Henry
Henry

VI
V

and
u

Pericles
and

u
tt
tt

u
<t

Two Gentlemen of Verona
Measure for Measure
Antony and Cleopatra

Henry

VIII

Romeo

and

Juliet

A
B

A

B
D
D

XVIII

III
III

Troilus and Cressida

B
B

3

A
A
A

I

and

3

A
A
A

111

Hamlet

C

XIII
XIII

XVII

XXV
XXV
XXVI
XXXVI

and

tt

X
XXXV

XV
XVI

tt

a

XVIII

XXIV
XXX

tt

u

VIII

A

XXXIII

tt

a

A

and

Fiesco
Don Carlos

tt

V

XI
IV

XIII

V
VI
VI
VI

XII
VI

VI
IX
XXXIII
XXXV

XI
XIV
XXI

XXII

XXV
XXIX

B

B
B

A
A
A

1

2
2
2
3

3
1
1
1

2
1
1
1
1

1
1

2
1

B

1

B
B

6

A

C
C
B
C
C
B
C
B
B

A

2
1

1
1
1
1

1

B
D
D

2

B

5

A
B

2
4
6

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Shakespeare:
tt

u
tt

Julius

XXX
XXX
XXX
XXX

Ccesar

Henry IV
Macbeth
Richard

III

of Errors
XXXII
tt
Much Ado About Nothing
XXXII
u
Othello
XXXII
u
Cymbeline
XXXII
tt
A Winter's Tale
XXXV
Shaw: Mrs. Warren's Profession
XXVII
Shelley: The Cenci
XIII B 3 and XXVI
X
Sienkiewicz: By Fire and Sword
;
I
Chyses
Sophocles;
t*
I
Minos
tt
I
Oicles
u
I
CEdipus at Colonus
tt

Comedy

III

tt
tt
M
tt

tt
M
tt
tt

tt

it
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt

U
tt
tt
tt
tt

and

Nausicaa
The Pheacians

I

I

Philoctetes at Troy
Eurysaces
Andromeda
JEgeus
Peleus

r

II
II

II
and

CEnee

Phineus
Aletes and Erigone
Nauplius

Ixion

The Feast of the Achaeans

Phrixus

Tereus
The Epigones

Electra
Eriphyle

Meleager
Ajax Locrian
Laocoon
The Shepherds
The Xoanephores
Teucer

I
T

Acrisius

Iolas

XII

VII

II
II
II

III

III
III
III
III
III
IV

IV
IV
IV
V
V

VI
VI
VI

195

A

2

B

c
c

A
B
B
B

A
B

A
A
A
A
A
A
B
B
B
B
C

A
B
B
C
B
B
B

A
A
A
B
B
B

A

A
A

J
]
1
1

1

2
1

5
3
1
1
1

3
1
1

2
3
2
1

1
1

2
2

2
1

2
5
2
4
5
1
1
1

B
B
C

A

1

A

2

C

2

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

196

Sophocles: The Councile of the Argives
"
Laconian Women
"
binon
"

"
"

"
"
"
"

"
"
"
"
"
"
"

"
"

"
"

"
"

"
"

"
"
"
"

"

"
"

L&nomaus

Orithyie
ihe Abduction of Helen
Hermione
Polyidus
Women of Scyros
Ulysses
Philoctetes
Helen Reclaimed
Thyestes II

Amphitryon
Alceste
Iphigenia
Iobate
Lemnian Women
Women of Colchis
Antigone
The Maidens of Trachis
Alcmeon
Phasdra

Thamiras
Niobe
"
Eumele
"
The Phtiotides
"
Palamede
"
Thyestes at Sicyon
"
The Captives
"
Laocoon
"
Polyxena
"
The Ethiopians
Soubhata: The Message of Angada
Soudraka: The Earthen Toy-cart

IX

C
D
D

X

A

X

c
A
c
c

XI
XI
XI

anc

1
1

2

B

XII

A

sail
XVI

B

XII

Eumele
Pelias

Procris

A

X

Ajax

(Edipus the King
Creusa
Telephus
Euryale
Alexander

IX

IX
IX

c
A

2
2
3

2

XVII
XVII

A
c

XVIII

A

1

B

1

XIX

XIX
XIX

XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XXI

XXIII
XXVI
XXIII
XXV
XX

XXV
XXV
XXVI
XXXL
XXXI

XXXI
XXXII
XXXIII

XXXV
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
XXXVI
X

XXIV

1

4

E
B

1

B

2

C
G

I

F

A
A

1

3
1
1

B
B

2

A

3

A

B
B
B
B
B
B

1

1

1

4
1

3

4
5

C

4

C

2

A
A

]

A
C
C

A

1

1

2
5

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Soundara Misra: Abhirama mani
Speroni: Canace
Spontini: The Lanaides
Stace: Agave
Stein: La Veuve joyeuse
Sue: Les Enfants naturels

X
XXVI

XXIII
XXXI

\XVIII

XVIII

Tarbe: Monsieur de Morat
Tasso: Torrismond
"
Jerusalem Delivered
Tchang-Koue-pin:
The Tunic Sonfronted
Tellez: Don Juan
Terni (Mme.): Les Baillinnes
Theodecte: GEdipus
"
Lyncee
Theuriet: La Maison des deux Barzeaux
Thomas: Francoise de Rimini
Tiercelin: Un voyage de noces
Tirso de Molina: Don Juan
Tolstoi: The Powers of Darkness

"
"

and

Resurrection
The Kreutzer Sonata
Torquet: Cent lignes emues
Trarieux: La Dette
Trissino: Sophonisbe
Tristan 1' Hermite: Marianne

Vacquerie: Proserpine
"
Jalousie
Vallette: Le Vierge
Valnay: L'Esclase du devoir
Van Velde (Mme.): Lena
Vauzelles (de) : Alceste
Veber: Les Grands
Vedanyatha Vatchespati: Tchitra Yadjgna
Verga: Chevalerie rustique
Verhaeren:
Le Cloitre
Verlaine: Louise Leclercq
Verne: Le Tour du monde en 80 jours
"
Les Enfants du capitaine Grant
Villemer: L'Absente
Villiers: Don Juan

XXV

197

c
c

B

A
A
A
B

XVIII
XIX

A

V

B

G

III

A

XXXVI

A
A

XVIII
XXIII
XXV

XXV
XXV
V

XIII
XV
XX

XXV
XXXVI

XIV
XX

B
C
C

A

2
2
3
1

2
2

3

2
1
1

2
1

3
4
3
2

B

F
A
C
D
C
B
B

1

1

1

3

XXXII

A

XXV

B

7

C

5

B

3

XXXII
XXXIII
XXXII
XXVII
XXI

XXXIII
XXXI
XXII
XXXIV

XVII
IX

XXXV

XXVII

V

A
B

A
A

B

A
A

1

3

4
1

3

2
10
2

C

2

D

1

B
B

1

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

198

Villiers *ie ITsle Adam: Le Nouveau-Monde XXV
Vira: Madhouranirouddha
XIX
Vishakadatta:
The Minister's Ring
XII
Viswanatha:

Mrigancalckha

4
tt
tt
tt
tt

tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt
M
tt
tt
tt
tt
tt

a
tt
tt
tt

tt
tt
tt

Adelaide Duguesclin
Agathocle
Amelie
Don Pedre
Samson
Pandore

'

and

,:
.

Alzire
Le Triumvirat

!

"'

',".'.
'

XXX

Catilina

and

La Mort de Caesar

and

Zaire

Artemire
Oreste

W

tt
tt

Parsifal

Die Meistersinger
Tannhauser

VIII

XXX

XXXII
XXXII

Marianne
Tancrede

Wagner: Lohengrin
tt
The Ring of the Nibelungs
a

,

;

XIII
XVIII

XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XIX
XXI
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXIV
XXVII
XXVIII
XXIX
XXIX
XXIX

::

i

XXrV

II

XXXII
XXXII

A
A
A
A
A
C

-

c
A
A
A
A
A
B
D
D

A
A
A
B
D

A
A
B
B
B

A
A
A
A
A
A
c

A

II

A

IX

XXIV

XXII

4
1

1
2
2

2
2
3
1
1

2
1
2

2
1

E

XXXIV

V

1

A

IV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XIV
XVII
XVII

,

Les Pelopides
(Edipe
Les Guebres
Les Lois de Minos
Merope
"Semiramis
Mahomet
Le Huron
Tanis et Zelide
Zulime
Brutus
Nanine
Les Scythes
Olympie
Irene

A
A

XXIV

Voltaire : Eriphyle
u

C

c
c

A
A

2
2
3
o

4
1
1

4
1

4
1

2
1
1

2
2
2

2
9
2

INDEX OF AUTHORS
Wagner: Tristan and Isolde
Webster: Vittoria Corombona
"

XXV
XV
XXIV

Appius and Virginia
The Duchess of Maifi
"
Sir Thomas Wyat
Wells: The War of the Worlds
Werner:

XXIX
XXX

VI

Attila

The Twenty-fourth

Luther

of February

III

XIX
XX

Lelie
Wolf: Les Lys

XXIV
XXXIII
XXII
XXIV
XXII
XXVIII

Xenocles: CEdipus

XVIII

Wicheler:

Le Mariage

Mile. Beulemans

de

Widor: Maitre Ambros

Wilde: Salome
Willy: Le Friquet

"

La Cellule No.
Zamacois: Bohemos
Zamora: Don Juan
Zola: Le Reve
" La
Debacle
Zaccone:

"

"
"

"
''

"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"

III

7

XXIV

V

I

VI
VI

L'Argent

Germinal
La Terre
Therese Raquin

La Bete humaine
L'ffiuvre
La Joie de vivre
La Faute de l'abbe Mouret
La Conquete de Plassans

Nana
L'Assommoir
Le Capitaine Burle
Jacques Damour
Pot-bouille
Renee

and

and
and

XVII
VIII

xm

XXX
XV

XXXIV
XVI
XX

XXI
and

XXIV

XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII
XXII

XXV
XXV
XXVI

199

c

A
A
A

3
1
3
1

B

A
A
B

A
A
B

B
B
C
D

2
1
1

4
3
1

6
2
1

A

1

B

3

A

9

B
B

A

2
1

B

A
B
B
C

A
A
A
A
A
B

A
A
A
C
C
C
C
B

2
2

I
[

1

4
2
4
2
7
1

2
6

2
1

2
7
2

THIRTY-SIX DRAMATIC SITUATIONS

200

Zola: La Curée
" Dr. Pascal
" Son Excellence Eugene
" La Fortune des Rougon
" Le Ventre de Paris
" Madeleine
Zorilla: Don Juan

XXVI
XXVI
XXX
XXX

XXXIII
XXXIV

B
B

c
c
c
B

V

B

III

A

2

2
1
1

2
1

ANONYMOUS
Chinese: The Singer
Hindu: Anarghara-ghava
"
Dhourtta Narttaka
"
Dhourtta Samagama
"
Hanouman
Mystery: Le Mystère d'Adam
Miracles : Robert-le-Diable
"
Barlaam et Josaphat
"
La Mère meutrière de son en
"

"
"
"
"
"
"

"

fant

Saint Alexis
Saint Lgnace d'Antioche
Guibor

L'Empereur Julien
La Mère du Pape
La Fille du roi d'Espagne

Berthe-au-grand-pied
La Reine aux trois fils
Berthequine

X

XXII

XXIV
X
VI
V

X

XVII
XIX

c
A
A
c
D

3

c

2

A

G

XXXI
XXXI

A

XXXV
XXXV
XXXV

2
3

A

XXXII

1

9

A

XX

XXIII

1

2

B

B
B

3

4
4

2
4

2

^

