DISSERTATION ON THE ART OF COMBINATIONS
1666
(Selections)
The Dissertatio de arte combinatoria, which Leibniz published in 1666, was an expansion
of the dissertation and theses submitted for disputation the same year to qualify for a
position in the philosophical faculty at Leipzig. The work contains the germ of the plan
for a universal characteristic and logical calculus, which was to occupy his thinking for
the rest of his life. That project is here conceived as a problem in the arithmetical combi-
nation of simple into complex concepts, Leibniz deriving basic theorems on permutation
and combination and applying them to the classification of cases in logic, law, theology,
and other fields of thought. His later judgment on the work was that in spite of its imma-
turity and its defects, especially in mathematics, its basic purpose was sound.
Three introductory sections which supply the metaphysical and logical foundations of
work are given here. They are (I) a demonstration of the existence of God with which
he prefaced the work; (II) the 'corollaries' prepared for the disputation; and (III) the
definitions introducing the work itself The solution of the first two problems and several
applications are also included.
I. DEMONSTRATION OF THE EXISTENCE OF GOD
[G, IV, 32-33]
Hypotheses [Praecognita]1:
1. Definition 1. God is an incorporeal substance of infinite power [virtus].
2. Definition 2. I call substance whatever moves or is moved.
3. Definition 3. Infinite power is an original capacity [potential to move the infinite.
For power is the same as original capacity; hence we say that secondary causes operate
by virtue [virtus] of the primary.
4. Postulate. Any number of things whatever may be taken simultaneously and yet
be treated as one whole. If anyone makes bold to deny this, I will prove it. The concept
ofparts is this: given a plurality of beings all of which are understood to have something
in common; then, since it is inconvenient or impossible to enumerate all of them every
time, one name is thought of which takes the place of all the parts in our reasoning,
to make the expression shorter. This is called the whole. But in any number of given
things whatever, even infinite, we can understand what is true of all, since we can
enumerate them all individually, at least in an infinite time. It is therefore permissible
to use one name in our reasoning in place of all, and this will itself be a whole.2
5. Axiom 1. If anything is moved, there is a mover.
6. Axiom 2. Every moving body is being moved.
7. Axiom 3. If all its parts are moved, the whole is moved.
For references see p. 83

74                                                                                           LEIBNIZ: PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
8. Axiom 4. Every body whatsoever has an infinite number of parts; or, as is
commonly said, the continuum is infinitely divisible.
9. Observation. There is a moving body.
Proof [1MM:rig]:
1. Body A is in motion, by hypothesis No. 9.
2. Therefore there is something which moves it, by No. 5,
3. and this is either incorporeal
4. because it is of infinite power, by No. 3;
5. since A, which it moves, has infinite parts, by No. 8;
6. and is a substance, by No. 2.
7. It is therefore God, by No. 1 Q.E.D.
8. Or it is a body,
9. which we may call B.
10. This is also moved, by No. 6,
11. and what we have demonstrated about body A again applies, so that
12. either we must sometime arrive at an incorporeal power, as we showed in the
case of A, in steps 1-7 of the proof, and therefore at God;
13. or in the infinite whole there exist bodies which move each other continuously.
14. All these taken together as one whole can be called C, by No. 4.
15. And since all the parts of C are moved, by step 13,
16. C itself is moved, by No. 7,
17. and by some other being, by No. 5,
18. namely, by an incorporeal being, since we have already included all bodies,
back to infinity, in C, by step 14. But we need something other than C, by 17 and 19,
19. which must have infinite power, by step No. 3, since C, which is moved by it,
is infinite, by steps 13 and 14;
20. and which is a substance, by No. 2,
21. and therefore God, by No. 1.
Therefore, God exists. Q. E.D.3
II. COROLLARIES FOR DISPUTATION4
[G., IV, 41-43]
An Arithmetical Disputation on Complexions, which Mr. Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
of Leipzig will hold in the famous university of Leipzig, by permission of its distin-
guished philosophical faculty, on March 7,1666.
I. Logic
1. There are two primary propositions. The first is the principle of all theorems or
necessary propositions: what is (so) either is or is not (so), or conversely. The other
is the basis of all observations or contingent propositions: something exists.
2. Perfect demonstrations are possible in all disciplines.
3. If we regard the disciplines in themselves, they are all theoretical; if their appli-
cation, they are all practical. Those, however, from which the application follows more
immediately are rightly called practical par excellence.
4. Although every method can be employed in every discipline, as we follow the
traces either of our own investigation or of the producing nature in our treatment, it yet

MAINZ AND PARIS, 1666-76                                                                             75
happens in the practical disciplines that the order of nature and that of knowledge
coincides, because here the nature of the thing itself originates in our thought and pro-
duction. For the end in view both moves us to produce the means and leads us to
know them, which is not true in the matters which we can merely know but cannot
also produce. Moreover, although every method is allowed, not every one is expedient.
5. The end of logic is not the syllogism but simple contemplation. The proposition is,
in fact, the means to this end, and the syllogism is the means to the proposition.
H. Metaphysics
1. One infinite is greater than another. (Cardan, Pract. Arith., chap. 66, nn. 165 and
260. Seth Ward is said to dissent in his Arithmetic of Infinites.$)
2. God is substance; creature is accident.
3. A discipline concerning created beings in general is needed, but this is nowadays
usually included in metaphysics.
4. It is very improbable that the term cause expresses an unequivocal concept to
cover efficient, material, formal, and final causes. For what is the word influx, more
than a mere word? 6
III. Physics
1. Since we may observe that other cosmic bodies move about their own axes, it is
not absurd that the same should be true of the earth; but neither is the contrary.
2. Since the most general difference between bodies is that of density and rarity",
the four primary qualities may obviously be explained as follows: the humid is the rare,
the dry is the dense, the warm is the rarefying, and the cold is the condensing. Every-
thing rare is easily confined within external boundaries, but with difficulty within its
own boundaries; everything dense, the contrary. In the rare, everything that rarefies
facilitates the quickening of the homogeneous with respect to itself and the separation
of the heterogenous; in the dense the way to this is blocked. A reason is thus supplied
for the Aristotelian definitions. Nor does fire, which seems to be rare but must actually
be dry, provide an exception to this, for I reply that one thing is to be said about fire
per se and another of fire which inheres in other bodies, for in this case it follows the
nature of these bodies. Thus it is clear that a flame, which is nothing but burning air,
must be fluid just as is air itself. On the other hand, the fire which consists of burning
iron is like iron itself.
3. It is a fiction that the force of the magnet is checked by steel.
IV. Practical
1. Justice (particular) is a virtue serving the mean in the affections of one man to-
ward another, the affections of enjoying and of harming, or those of good will and hate.
The rule of the mean is to gratify another (or myself) as long as this does not harm a third
person (or another). This must be noted in order to defend Aristotle against the cavil of
Grotius, who speaks as follows in the Prolegomena of his de Jure belli et pacis (Sec. 4):
That this principle (that virtue consists in the mean) cannot correctly be assumed as universal
is clear even in the case of justice. For since he (Aristotle) was unable to find the opposites of
excess and defect in the affections and the actions which follow from them, he sought them
both in the things themselves with which justice is concerned. But this is obviously to leap from
one genus of things to another, a fault which he rightly criticizes in others.8
For references see p. 83

76                                                                                             LEIBNIZ: PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
Grotius, namely, maintains that it is inconsistent to introduce into the species of a
classification something which is derived by another principle of classification; he
calls this, not too philosophically, "leaping over into another genus". Certainly the
mean in affections is one thing, the mean in things another, and virtues are habits, not
of things but of minds. Therefore I show that justice is also found in a moderation of
the affections.
2. Thrasymachus well says, in Plato's Republic, Book I, that justice is what is useful
to the more powerful. For in a proper and simple sense, God is more powerful than
others. In an absolute sense one man is not more powerful than another, since it is
possible for a strong man to be killed by a weak one. Besides, usefulness to God is not
a matter of profit but of honor. Therefore the glory of God is obviously the measure of
all law. Anyone who consults the theologians, moralists, and writers on cases of con-
science will find that most of them base their arguments on this. Once this principle
is established as certain, therefore, the doctrine of justice can be worked out scientifi-
cally. Until now this has not been done.9
III. CUM DEO!
[G., IV, 35-75]
1. Metaphysics, to begin at the top, deals with being and with the affections of being
as well. Just as the affections of a natural body are not themselves bodies, however, so
the affections of a being are not themselves beings.
2. An affection (or mode) of a being, moreover, is either something absolute, which
is called quality, or something relative, and this latter is either the affection of a thing
relative to its parts if it has any, that is, quantity, or that of one thing relative to an-
other, relation. But if we speak more accurately and assume a part to be different from
the whole, the quantity of a thing is also a relation to its part.
3. Therefore, it is obvious that neither quality nor quantity nor relation is a being;
it is their treatment in a signate actuality that belongs to metaphysics.
4. Furthermore, every relation is either one of union or one of harmony [convenientia].
In union the things between which there is this relation are called parts, and taken
together with their union, a whole. This happens whenever we take many things simul-
taneously as one. By one we mean whatever we think of in one intellectual act, or at
once. For example, we often grasp a number, however large, all at once in a kind of
blind thought, namely, when we read figures on paper which not even the age of
Methuselah would suffice to count explicitly.
5. The concept of unity is abstracted from the concept of one being, and the whole
itself, abstracted from unities, or the totality, is called number.i° Quantity is therefore
the number of parts. Hence quantity and number obviously coincide in the thing itself,
but quantity is sometimes interpreted extrinsically, as it were, in a relation or ratio to
another quantity, to aid us, namely, when the number of parts is unknown.
6. This is the origin of the ingenious specious analysisl 1 which Descartes was the
f                                                                                              i                                           rst to work out, and which Francis Schotten and Erasmus Bartholin later organized
into principles, the latter in what he calls the Elements of Universal Mathematics.
Analysis is thus the science of ratios and proportions, or of unknown quantity, while
arithmetic is the science of known quantity, or numbers. But the Scholastics falsely
believed that number arises only from the division of the continuum and cannot be

MAINZ AND PARIS, 1666-76                                                                          77
applied to incorporeal beings. For number is a kind of incorporeal figure, as it were,
which arises from the union of any beings whatever; for example, God, an angel, a
man, and motion taken together are four.
7. Since number is therefore something of greatest universality, it rightly belongs to
metaphysics, if you take metaphysics to be the science of those properties which are
common to all classes of beings. For to speak accurately, mathematics (adopting this
term now) is not one discipline but small parts taken out of different disciplines and
dealing with the quantity of the objects belonging to each of them. These parts have
rightly grown together because of their cognate nature. For as arithmetic and analysis
deal with the quantity of beings, so geometry deals with the quantity of bodies, or of
the space which is coextensive with bodies. Far be it from us, certainly, to destroy the
social distribution of disciplines among the professions, which has followed conve-
nience in teaching rather than the order of nature.
8. Furthermore, the whole itself (and thus number or totality) can be broken up
into parts, smaller wholes as it were. This is the basis of complexions, provided you
understand that there are common parts in the different smaller wholes themselves.
For example, let the whole be ABC; then AB, BC, and AC will be smaller wholes, its
parts. And the disposition of the smallest parts, or of the parts assumed to be smallest
(that is, the unities) in relation to each other and to the whole can itself also be varied.
Such a disposition is called situs.12
9. So there arise two kinds of variation: complexion and situs. And viewed in them-
selves, both complexion and situs belong to metaphysics, or to the science of whole
and parts. If we look at their variability, however, that is, at the quantity of variation,
we must turn to numbers and to arithmetic. I am inclined to think that the science of
complexions pertains more to pure arithmetic, and that of situs to an arithmetic of
f                                                                                                 i    gure. For so we understand unities to produce a line. I want to note here in passing,
however, that unities can be arranged either in a straight line or in a circle or some
other closed line or lines which outline a figure. In the former case they are in absolute
situs or that of parts to the whole, or order; in the latter they are in relative situs or that
of parts to parts, or vicinity. In definitions 4 and 5, below, we shall tell how these differ.
Here these preliminary remarks will suffice to bring to light the discipline upon which
our subject matter is based.'
DEFINITIONS
1. Variation here means change of relation. For change may be one of substance,
or of quantity, or of quality; still another kind changes nothing in the thing but only its
relation, its situs, its conjunction with some other thing.
2.  Variability is the quantity of all variations. For the limits of powers taken in
abstraction denote their quantity; so it is frequently said in mechanics that the power
of one machine is double that of another.
3. Situs is the location of parts.
4. Situs is either absolute or relative; the former is that of the parts with respect to
the whole, the latter that of parts to parts. In the former the number of places is con-
sidered, and the distance from the beginning and the end; in the latter neither the
beginning nor the end is considered, but only the distance of one part from another
part is viewed. Hence the former is expressed by a line or by lines which do not inclose
For references see p. 83

78                                                                                             LEIBNIZ: PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
a figure or close upon themselves, and best by a straight line; the latter is expressed by a
line or lines inclosing a figure, and best by a circle. In the former much consideration
is given to priority and posteriority; in the latter, none. We will therefore do well to
call the former order,
5. And the latter vicinity. The former is disposition; the latter, composition. Thus
by reason of order the following situses are different: abcd, bcda, cdab, dabc. But in
b
vicinity there can be no variation but only situs, namely, this: a c. Thus when the
d
very witty Taubman was dean of the philosophical faculty at Wittenberg, he is said
to have placed the names of Master's candidates on the public program in a circular
arrangement, so that eager readers should not learn who held the position of `swine'."
6. We will usually mean the variability of order when we take variations par
excellence; for example, 4 things can be arranged in 24 ways."
7. The variability of a complex we call complexions; for example, 4 things can be put
together in 15 different ways."
8. The number of varying things we shall call simply number; for example, 4 in the
case proposed.
9. A complexion is the union of a smaller whole within the greater, as we have said
in the introduction.
10. In order to determine a certain complexion, however, the greater whole is to be
divided into equal parts assumed as minima (that is, parts now not to be considered as
further divisible). Of these parts it is composed, and by the variation of them the
complexion or lesser whole may be varied. Because the lesser whole itself is greater or
less according as more parts are included at any time, we call the number of parts or
unities to be connected together at one time the exponent, after the example of a
geometric progression. For example, let the whole be ABCD. If the lesser whole is to
consist of two parts, for example, AB, AC, AD, BC, BD, CD, the exponent will be 2;
if of three parts, for example, ABC, ABD, ACD, BCD, the exponent will be 3.
11. We shall write the complexions with a given exponent as follows: if the exponent
is 2, com2nation (combination); if 3, con3nation (contemation); if 4, con4nation; etc.
12. Complexions taken simply are all the complexions computed for all exponents;
for example, 15 of the number 4. These consist of 4 units, 6 com2nations, 4 con3nations,
1 con4nation.
13. A useful (useless) variation is one which can (cannot) occur because of the nature
of the subject matter; for example, the four [physical] elements can be com2ned six
times, but two com2nations are useless, namely, those in which the contraries fire and
water and the contraries air and earth are com2ned
PROBLEMS
Three things should be considered: problems, theorems, and applications. We have
added the application to individual problems wherever it seemed worth while, and the
theorems also. To some of the problems, however, we have added a demonstration. Of
these, we owe the latter part of the first problem, and the second and fourth, to others;
the rest we ourselves have discovered. We do not know who was the first to discover
them. Schwenter (Delic., Book i, Sec.                                                          1, prop. 32) says they exist in Jerome Cardan,

MAINZ AND PARIS,  1666-76                                                                    79
John Buteonis, and Nicolas Tartalea. But we have not found them in Cardan's
Arithmetica practica, published in Milan in 1539. Christopher Clavius set forth espe-
cially clearly what has been found recently, in his Commentarium in Sphaeram Joannis
de Sacro Bosco, published in Rome in 1585, pages 33 ff.17
Problem I
To Discover the Complexions for a Given Number and Exponent
1. There are two ways of solving this problem, one for all complexions, the other for
com2nations only. The former is more general, but the latter requires fewer data,
namely, only the number and the exponent, while the former also presupposes the
discovery of antecedent complexions.18
2. We have developed the more general method; the special one is popularly known.
The more general solution is this: Add the complexions of the number preceding the
given number, by the given exponent and by the exponent preceding it; the sum will be
the desired complexions. For example, let the given number be 4 and the exponent 3;
add the 3 com2nations and the 1 con3nation of the preceding number 3; (3 + 1 =4).
The sum 4 will be the answer.
3. But since the complexions of the preceding number are required for this solution,
Table                                                                                        must be constructed. In it the top line contains the numbers from 0 to 12
inclusive from left to right (we believe this is far enough, since it is easily extended);
the vertical line at the left contains the exponents from 0 to 12, reading from top to
bottom; and the bottom line, from left to right, contains the total complexions [com-
plexiones simpliciter]. The lines between contain the complexions for the number given
at the head of the corresponding column and for the exponent given at the left.19
4. The reason for this solution, and the basis of the table, will be clear if we demon-
TABLE tt
                                                                                                                                                                         0    1    1    1    1    1     1     1     1      1      1      1       1       1
                                                                                                                                                                         1    0    1    2    3    4     5     6     in     8u     9m     10b     1 le    12r
                                                                                                                                                                         2    0    0    1    3    6     10    15    21     28     36     45      55      66
                                                                                                                                                                         3    0    0    0    1    4     10    20    35     56     84     120     165     220
                                                                                                                                                                         4    0    0    0    0    1     5     15    35     70     126    210     330     495
                                                                                                                                                                         5    0    0    0    0    0     1     6     21     56     126    252     462     792          g
00                                                                                                                                                                       6    0    0    0    0    0     0     1     7      28     84     210     462     924     ,0   2
0                                                                                            ra.                                                                         '7   0    0    0    0    0     0     0     1      8      36     120     330     792          .I..
ul                                                                                                                                                                       8    0    0    0    0    0     0     0     0      1      9      45      165     495          0
                                                                                                                                                                         9    0    0    0    0    0     0     0     0      0      1      10      55      220
                                                                                                                                                                         10   0    0    0    0    0     0     0     0      0      0      1       11      66
                                                                                                                                                                         11   0    0    0    0    0     0     0     0      0      0      0       1       12
                                                                                                                                                                         12   0    0    0    0    0     0     0     0      0      0      0       0       1
                                                                                                                                                                         •    0    1.   3.   7.   15.   31.   63.   127.   255.   511.   1023.   2047.   4095.
                                                                                                                                                                         t    1.   2.   4.   8.   16.   32.   64.   128.   256.   512.   1024.   2048.   4096.
• The complexions taken simply (or the sum of the complexions of all given exponents),
added to 1, equal the total of a geometric progression with base 2t. 20 . . .
For references see p. 83

80                                                                                                LEIBNIZ: PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
strate that the complexions for a given number and exponent arise from the sum of the
complexions of the preceding number, for both the given and the preceding exponents.
Taking the given number as 5 and the given exponent as 3, the antecedent number will
be 4; it will have 4 con3nations and 6 com2nations, by Table N. Now the number 5
has all the con3nations of the preceding number (since the part is contained in the
whole), namely, 4, and it has besides as many con3nations as the preceding number has
com2nations, since the unit by which the number 5 exceeds 4, added to each of the
individual com2nations of                                                                         4, will make the same number of con3nations. Thus
6 +4 =10. Therefore the complexions for a given number, etc. Q.E.D.
Problem II
To Discover the Complexions Taken Simply for a Given Number
Seek the given number among the exponents of a geometric progression with base 2;
then the total of complexions sought will be the number or term of the progression
whose exponent is the given number, minus 1. It is difficult to understand the reason or
demonstration for this, or to explain if it is understood. The fact, however, is apparent
from Table N. For when added together, and the sum added to unity, the particular
complexions of a given number always constitute, when one is added, the term of that
geometric progression with base 2, whose exponent is the given number. But if anyone
is interested in seeking the reason for this, it will have to be found in the process of
resolving used in the Practica italica, vont Zerfallen. This must be such that a given
term of the geometrical progression is separated into more parts by one than there are
units (i.e., numbers) in its exponent. The first of these must always be equal to the last,
the second to the next to the last, the third to the third from the last, etc., until, if it is
broken up into an equal number of parts, the exponent or number of things being odd,
the two parts in the middle will be equal (for example, 128 or 2' may be broken up into
eight parts according to Table N : 1, 7, 21, 35, 35, 21, 7, 1); or, if the exponent is even and
it must be broken into an odd number, the number left in the middle will have none
corresponding to it (for example, 256 or 2 8 may be broken up into nine parts according
to Table N: 1, 8, 28, 56, 70, 56, 28, 8, 1). Someone may therefore think that this brings
to light a new method which is absolute for solving problem 1; namely, by breaking up
the complexions taken simply, or the terms of a geometric progression with base 2,
by a method discovered with the aid of algebra. In fact, however, there are not sufficient
data, and the same number can be broken up in several ways yet according to the same
form.
Application of Problems I and Il
Since everything which exists or which can be thought must be compounded of parts,
either real or at least conceptual, whatever differs in kind must necessarily either differ
in that it has other parts, hence the use of complexions; or by another situs, hence the
use of dispositions. The former are judged by the diversity of matter; the latter, by the
diversity of form. With the aid of complexions, indeed, we may discover not only the
species of things but also their attributes. Thus almost the whole of the inventive part
of logic is grounded in complexions — both that which concerns simple terms and that
which concerns complex terms; in a word, both the doctrine of divisions and the doc-
trine of propositions; not to mention how much we hope to illumine the analytic part of

MAINZ AND PARIS,                                                                             1 6 6 6-7 6                                                                  81
logic, or the logic of judgment, by a diligent examination of the modes of the syllogism
in Example VI.
The use of complexions in divisions is threefold:                                            (1) given the principle of one
division, to discover its species; (2) given many divisions of the same genus, to discover
the species mixed from different divisions (this we will treat in Problem III, however);
(3) given the species, to discover the subaltern genera. Examples are scattered through-
out all of philosophy, and we will show that they are not lacking in jurisprudence. And
in medicine every variety of compounded medicaments and pharmaceuticals is made
by mixing various ingredients, though the greatest care is necessary in choosing useful
mixtures. First, therefore, we will give examples of species to be discovered by this
principle.21
I. Among jurisconsults the following division is proposed (Digests, Gaius, XVII, 1,
2). A mandate is contracted in five ways: in favor of the mandator, of the mandator and
mandatory, of a third person, of the mandator and a third person, of the mandatory
and a third person. We shall seek out the adequacy of the division in this way: its basis
is the question, for whom, or the person in whose favor the contract is made; there are
three of these, the mandator, the mandatory, and a third person. But there are seven
complexions of three things:
Three lnions: since contract may be in favor of only (1) the mandator; (2) the manda-
tory; or (3) a third person.
The same number of com2nations: (4) in favor of the mandator and mandatory;
(5) of the mandator and a third person; or (6) of the mandatory and a third person.
One con3nation: (7) in favor of the mandator, the mandatory, and a third person all
together.
Here the jurisconsults reject as useless that lnion in which the contract is in favor of
the mandatory alone, because this would be advice rather than a mandate. There
remain thus six classes. Why they kept only five, omitting the con3nation, I do not know.
II. Aristotle                                                                                (On Generation and Corruption, Book ii), with Ocellus Lucanus the
Pythagorean, deduces the number of elements, or of the mutable species of a simple
body, from the number of primary qualities, of which he assumes there are four, but
according to these laws: (1) that every element is to be a compound of two qualities
and neither more nor less, and it is thus obvious that lnions, con3nations, and the
con4nation are to be discarded and only com2nations retained, of which there are
six; and (2) that contrary qualities can never enter into one com2nation and that there-
fore two of the com2nations are useless because there are two contraries among these
primary qualities. Hence there remain four com2nations, the same as the number of
elements                                                                                     Moreover, as Aristotle derived the elements from these qualities, so Galen
derived from them the four temperaments, the various mixtures of which later medics
have studied; all of whom Claudius Campensis opposed in the past century, in his
Animadversiones naturales in Aristotelem et Galenum (Leyden 1576)
IV. In wind organs we call a register, in German ein Zug, a little shaft by whose
opening the sound may be varied, not with respect to the perceived melody or pitch
itself, but in its basis in the pipe, so that sometimes a shaking, sometimes a whisper, is
achieved. More than thirty of such qualities have been discovered by the industry of
our contemporaries. Assume that there are in some organs only twelve such simple
effects; then there will be in all about 4095, as many as there are complexions taken
simply of twelve things. So a great organist can vary his playing as he opens them
For references see p. 83

82                                                                                             LEIRNIZ:  PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
together, sometimes many, sometimes a few, sometimes these, sometimes those.
V. Thomas Hobbes, Elementa de corpore, Part I, chapter 5, classifies the things for
which there are terms built into a proposition, or in his own terminology, the named
things [nominata] for which there are names [nominal, into bodies (that is substances,
since for him every substance is a body), accidents, phantasms, and names. Thus a name
is a name either of bodies, for example man; or of accidents, for example, all abstrac-
tions, rationality, motion; or of phantasms, in which he includes space, time, all sen-
sible qualities, etc.; or of names, in which he includes second intentions. Since these
are com2ned with each other in six ways, there arise the same number of kinds of
propositions, and adding to these the cases in which homogeneous terms may be
com2ned (a body ascribed to body, accident to accident, phantasm to phantasm,
secondary concept to secondary concept), namely, four, the total is ten. Out of these
Hobbes thinks that only homogeneous terms can be usefully com2ned. If this is so, as
the common philosophy certainly also acknowledges, and abstract and concrete,
accident and substance, primary and secondary concepts, are wrongly predicated of
each other, this will be useful for the art of discovering propositions or for observing
the selection of useful com2nations out of the uncountable mixture of things
VIII. The eighth application is in the formation of cases by the jurisconsults. For one
cannot always wait for the lawmaker when a case arises, and it is more prudent to set
up the best possible laws without defects, from the first, than to intrust their restriction
and correction to fortune; not to mention the fact that in any state whatsoever, a
judicial matter is the better treated, the less is left to the decision of the judge (Plato,
Laws, Book ix; Aristotle, Rhetoric, Book i; Jacob Menochius, De arbitrariis judicum
questionibus et causis, Book i, proem. 1).
Moreover, the art of forming cases is founded on our doctrine of complexions. For
as jurisprudence is similar to geometry in other things, it is also similar in that both
have elements and both have cases. The elements are simples; in geometry figures,
a triangle, circle, etc; in jurisprudence an action, a promise, a sale, etc. Cases are
complexions of these, which are infinitely variable in either field. Euclid composed the
Elements of Geometry, the elements of law are contained in the Corpus furls, but in
both works more complicated cases are added. The simple terms in the law, however,
out of the combinations of which the rest arise, and as it were, the loci communes
and highest genera, have been collected by Bernhard Lavintheta, a Francisan monk,
in his commentary on the Ars magna of Lully (which see). To us it seems thus: the
terms from whose complexions there arises the diversity of cases in the law are persons,
things, acts, and rights
The basis of terms is the same in theology, which is, as it were, a kind of special
jurisprudence, but fundamental for the same reason as the others. For theology is a
sort of public law which applies in the Kingdom of God among men. Here the unfaith-
ful are like rebels; the church is like good subjects; ecclesiastical persons, and indeed
also the political magistrate, are like the subordinate magistrates; excommunication is
like banishment; the teaching of Sacred Scripture and the Word of God is like that of
the laws and their interpretation; that of the canon like the question of which of the
laws are authentic; that of fundamental errors like that of capital crimes; that of the
Final Judgment and the Last Day like that of the judiciary process and the rendered
judgment; that of the remission of sins like that of the pardoning power; that of eternal
punishment like that of capital punishment, etc

MAINZ AND PARIS, 1 6 6 6-7 6                                                                        83
REFERENCES
The term 'hypothesis' is used here in its Platonic and mathematical sense, applying to the
given principles upon which the demonstration is based. The term praecognitum appears in late
Scholastic works in the context of ontology.
2 Leibniz's facile identification of the whole with a collective name, and the part with a parti-
cular subsumed under this name, is supplemented below (No. 1, III, 4) with a definition of the
whole as a numerical relation between parts. Kabitz has shown that Leibniz's epistemology in
this early period was nominalistic, sensationalistic, and naively realistic. His attitude toward
nominalism is corrected in the introduction to the work of Nizolius (No. 6), but the distinction
between names or symbols and the real order represented is developed later, as the theory of
expression or representation becomes explicit.
3 For the next stage in Leibniz's cosmological argument for God's existence see No. 5, I; the
mature formulation is in No. 51.
4 These theses were prepared for public disputation and first printed together with the defini-
tions and first two problems. They are found in the footnote in G., IV, 41-43.
5 Leibniz has in mind the Arithmetic of Infnites of John Wallis rather than Seth Ward.
0 The theory that causality consists of an influxus physicus had been proposed by Francis
Suarez (1548-1617) as a solution to the problem of efficient causality and had established itself
through the wide use of his Disputationes metaphysicae (cf. Disp., XII, ii, 4).
7 Leibniz much later reports that as a boy of 15 or younger he had walked in the Rosental
near Leipzig, debating whether to accept the old philosophy of forms or the new atomism and

84                                                                                                    LEIBNIZ: PHILOSOPHICAL PAPERS AND LETTERS
mechanism and that he had decided in favor of the latter (G., III, 205, 606). Kabitz has shown
that his memory was in error here and that this decision could not have been made earlier than
1664 (K. Fischer, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz [5th ed.], p. 715). He is thus a mechanist at this
point, convinced that a quantitative determination is possible of all qualities. But how much
his thinking is still in the framework of Aristotelianism this and the following selections show.
8 Hugo Grotius, On the Law of War and Peace, Oxford 1925, p. 25. The influence of Grotius
was of decisive importance in the formation of Leibniz's legal thinking. Cf. p. 58, note 10.
9 The letter to Thomas Hobbes (No. 4) contains another statement of this argument.
10                                                                                                    In providing a metaphysical basis for the category of number, Leibniz is already searching,
following the tradition of Nicolas of Cusa, Galileo, and Descartes, for a mathematical science
more general than arithmetic and geometry but including both and thinks of it in terms of the
numbering of parts and their possible relationships. It was in the Paris period that he found
that numbers are incapable of maximal determination and separated mathematics from
metaphysics.
11 That is, algebra. Leibniz here overlooks the algebraic discoveries of Vieta, Cardan, and
others. At this time he knew Descartes only by hearsay (cf. No.                                       3) and little mathematics
beyond Euclid. Francis Schooten, professor at Leyden, edited the Opera mathematica of
Francis Vieta in                                                                                      1646 and also prepared an arrangement of Descartes's geometry which
Erasmus Bartholinus published as the Principia matheseos universalis sett introductio in geo-
nietriam Cartesii.
12 "Disposition is the arrangement of that which has parts" (Aristotle, Metaphysics 10270.
12 Mathematics is thus in this period of Leibniz's thought an abstract consideration of meta-
physical relations, particularly of those relational properties of substance upon which quantity
rests. Leibniz's general mathematics and logic were always grounded in metaphysical prin-
ciples.
14 Variations thus include, in modern terminology, both combinations and permutations,
while situs is a permutation. When this permutation is in circular order (as in the case of the
rearrangement in relation to each other of men seated about a table), it is vicinity; when relative
position to the whole is involved, it is order.
15 That is, the number of permutations of four things taken four at a time is 24.
18 Complexions are in modern terminology combinations; the latter term Leibniz reserves for
the special case of complexions of the second order. His example involves the total combina-
tions of four things, with exponents from 1 to 4. Later he calls this "complexions taken simply"
(Sec. 12).
17 Leibniz's source was Daniel Schwenter, Deliciae physico-mathematicae, Ntimberg 1651-53.
18 Leibniz seems to have known a formula only for the combination of n things taken two at a
time, namely, C2a =n(n —1), and to have been ignorant of the more general form. He therefore
chooses a tabular method suggestive of Pascal's triangle.
19 Note that the table involves a derivation of complexions by the additive use of 0 and 1 only
and thus anticipates Leibniz's later interest in the binary number system.
20 Thus the total combinations of n terms=20 —1. We omit several sections dealing with
special aspects of the rule for complexions.
21 Leibniz now offers twelve applications, most of which must be omitted because of length.
For his thought about traditional logic the sixth, here omitted, is perhaps most significant. It
contains his deduction of the valid modes and figures of the Aristotelian syllogism.
