ARS BREVIS
L

Introduction
The Ars brevis, historically Llull’s single most influential work,
was the culmination of a long process of adaptation in response
to criticisms concerning the complications and difficulties of
works such as the Ars demonstrativa.
As the Contemporary Life implies, Llull’s first teaching experience
at the University of Paris in 1288-9 must have been disheartening.1
One can easily imagine what today might be called the “culture
shock” of his coming to this, the greatest center of Western learn­
ing in the Middle Ages. As in any structured academic or intel­
lectual world, Paris had its fashions as to topics discussed, modes
of discussing them, and the vocabularly used. All of these were
far removed from the question Llull wanted to discuss: the con­
version of infidels, by means of a method—the Art—which re­
sembled nothing anybody had seen before, and employing a vo­
cabulary that must often have seemed bizarre.2
Llull, however, was not easily discouraged. Converting the in­
fidels was the task to which he had dedicated his life; the instru­
ment for doing so, the Art, was for him God-given; and the vo­
cabulary was essential to his purpose. So there was no question
of abandoning them; all he could do was to try to persuade the
Parisian schoolmen of the importance of his missionary aims,3 in
the process use the bizarre vocabulary more sparingly, and modify
the Art itself so that it would not look so alarming. And, of course,
what made it look alarming was the number and complication of
the figures, as well as the letter symbolism.4 5
Towards the beginning of 1290 in Montpellier, therefore, Llull
set about writing the Ars inventiva veritatisf beginning a new phase
of the Art that was to culminate in the twin works of the Ars brevis
1 See the “Life,” § 19.
2 See the above-mentioned section of the “Life” and n. Ill there for the specific nature
of these difficulties.
3 Llull rightly felt that it was important for the achievement of his goals to get the backing
of the French king and the University of Pans as representing the political and intellectual
centers of Europe.
4 Even the faithful disciple, le Myesier, complained to his master about “the confusion
caused by the meanings of the alphabet of the Ars demonstrativa and its sixteen figures, which
confound the mind”; cf. Hillg, p. 179.
5 See again § 19 of the “Life,” as well as Urvoy, Islam, p. 399.

ARS BREVIS

of 1308 and the Ars generalis ultima of 1305-8.6 In this process
several important changes were made in the Art. First, the figures
were reduced from twelve to four.7 This simplification involved
a jettisoning of principles that had been fundamental to the pre­
vious quaternary phase of the Art. For the reader who has become
accustomed to the mechanism of the Ars demonstrativa, it may be
hard to imagine the Art without Figures S, V,8 Y, and Z, as well
as without those of the Elements, Theology, Philosophy, and
Law. The most startling losses are those of Figure S and of the
Elemental Figure,9 both so basic to the quaternary phase of the
Art, the former as a touchstone for almost all its discourse, and
the latter as a foundation for so much of its analogical method.
In fact, the only figures left are A and T, along with the Dem­
onstrative Figure, which resurfaces completely altered—its First
Figure transformed into the Fourth of the new figures, and its
Second Figure into the Third.
The next major change was a reduction of the Alphabet from
twenty-three to nine letters.10 At the same time, Figures A and
T, since they were now represented directly in the Alphabet, were
reduced to nine components each. This involved a loss of seven
dignities of Figure A, and two of the triangles of Figure T.11 More­
over, Llull now made explicit something only implied in the Ars
demonstrativa:12 that is, multiple significates for each letter. This
would have been confusing had it not been for a concomitant
change that probably did more than anything to defuse the com­
plaints of Llull’s critics. From now on the letters of the Alphabet
6 For the ternary phase of the Art see “Lull’s Thought,” text at n. 17 above. For the
date and place of composition, see the end of the Ars brevis and n. 2 there.
7 Or sixteen to four, as some have claimed; see the Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 1, as
well as n. 4 above. The four figures of the Ars inventiva veritatis at the beginning of the
ternary phase are identical with those of the Ars brevis at the end of that phase.
8 The components of Figure V returned later on in a different setting; cf. p. 574 below.
9 The disappearance of elemental theory as a foundation of the Art was perhaps related
to a new orientation away from the School of Medicine of Montpellier and towards the
Arts Faculty of Paris.
10 See the eleventh miniature of the Breviculum (Pl. vi and Hillg, pp. 179-80), where the
two alphabets are compared.
11 The first blue triangle (God-creature-operation) and the last black one (affirmationdoubt-denial), although the latter resurfaces as Question B of Part iv here. Notice that the
remaining three triangles are those of the Principles of Medicine-, cf. Dist. I, n. 12 of that
work.
12 Cf. Ars demonstrativa, Prologue, n. 2, and Dist. I, nn. 4, 43.

INTRODUCTION

573

were not to be used in the text itself; they were kept merely for
convenience in the combinatorial manipulation of the figures13 and
for an occasional reference to a given Rule or Question. Gone,
therefore, was the algebraic look of the Lullian discourse.
So far I have dwelt almost exclusively on losses; the gains came
from unexpected quarters. The first was in the form of definitions
(of the eighteen principles from Figures A and T, of the Virtues
and Vices, of the Hundred Forms, etc.). The intensely structural
and functional approach of the previous quaternary phase of the
Art could have led one to develop a coherent and convincing the­
ory as to why Llull had shunned definitions. Suddenly, however,
they appear in the Ars inventiva veritatis, and they soon take on
such importance that one scholar was able to characterize Llull as
the “master of definitions.”14 In fact, however, Llull has aban­
doned none of his former approach; he has merely made his def­
initions purely functional, like modern mathematicians, who do
not say what a thing is, but only what it does.15
The second gain was one that would probably bring Llull his
greatest fame in succeeding centuries, and that would become
known as the “Ars combinatoria.” Initially it appears as a device
to compensate for the loss of basic principles that formerly con­
stituted the building blocks of the Art; but one soon sees that it
is in fact the replacement of a vast sprawling structure, whose parts
are loosely and often only implicitly (or analogically) interrelated,
by a far more compact structure, whose parts are very tightly and
much more explicitly and mechanically interrelated.
The building of this edifice, which only achieved its final form
in the Ars brevis and its companion work, the Ars generalis ultima,16
was, however, a slow process that occupied the entire Ternary
Phase of the Art. Of the beginnings in the Ars inventiva veritatis,
13 Llull himself says in the Prologue to the Ars inventiva veritatis (MOG v, 1), “In this
Art we will necessarily have to use letters in place of terms in the figures, but not in the
discourse [non autem in processu]; for otherwise no inquiry or invention could be carried out
with the last two figures of this Art.”
14 The phrase was coined by Diego Ruiz; cf. Ca n, 417, and J. Rubio Balaguer in EL 5
(1961), 143.
15 For this definitional doctrine, see Part m, n. 1 below and the references there.
16 For the close relation between the two works—they correspond part for part—see
the Invocation and Prologue below and the notes there.

574

ARS BREVIS

the only portions to survive intact were the nine-letter alphabet,17
the four figures, and the definitions of the eighteen principles,
which were to form Parts mi of the two definitive works. The
Rules as well as the ternary combinations of Conditions in the Ars
inventiva veritatis18 are only rough preliminaries to the definitively
formalized Rules and Table of the Taula general of 1293-4,19 which
later became Parts iv and v of the Ars brevis and the Ars generalis
ultima. This gave Llull his basic combinatorial material; what he
added in subsequent works was, first, a systematization of its use
and interpretation, which became the Evacuation of the Third Fig­
ure, the Multiplication of the Fourth Figure, and the Mixture of
Principles and Rules, constituting Parts vivm of the Ars brevis and
the Ars generalis ultima.20 Second, he added a systematization of
the scala naturae, to which this mechanism could be applied; these
constituted the Nine Subjects of Part ix of the same two works.
Moreover, the last of these Nine Subjects (the Instrumentative),
included a reintroduction of the Virtues and Vices of the earlier
Figure V, now expanded to nine each so they could be included
in the nine-letter alphabet. Third, he added a section on applica­
tion, or how in actual practice to use the Art, which would become
Part x of the same two works, and would include that curious
Fullian conceptual dictionary called the Hundred Forms.
This brief introduction will perhaps give some idea of how
much the Art has now become not only a structure in itself, but
also one in which the relation of its own inner parts is structured,
as well as its relation to subject (the user) and object (the world)—
an extraordinary network of systems systematizing systems. This
means, in fact, an almost total mechanization of the process of the
Art, and hence of our process of thought and its application to
the world about us. This first such attempt in Western thought,
this idea of an ars combinatoria and the possibilities it seemed to
17 Although of the concepts referred to by each letter, only the first two are the same
in the Ars inventiva veritatis (MOG v, 13) as in the final form reached in the Liber de praedicatione of 1304 (ROL hi, 35 and 143-4). The other section of the Ars inventiva veritatis that
survived throughout the ternary phase was the “De habituatione” (MOG v, 204-6) which
reappeared as Part xn of the Ars brevis and Ars generalis ultima.
MOG v, 37ff. and 14ff., respectively.
19 ORL xvi, 337ff. and 356ff., respectively. For more details concerning the Rules, see
Part iv, n. 1 below.
20 For the often complicated prehistory of these and subsequent parts of the Ars brevis,
see the notes at the beginning of individual parts, as well as my “Notes,” p. 86.

INTRODUCTION

575

promise, intrigued succeeding generations down to Leibniz; it has
earned Llull the title of discovering the germ, however remote
and primitive, of modern computer science.21
This mechanization was accompanied by another major change:
the abandonment of analogical methods. As a mode of reasoning,
analogy was replaced by traditional logic, and as a way of relating
the foundations of the Art to the rest of the intelligible world, it
was replaced by inclusion. As to the first, the reader will not have
gone far into the work before he finds himself immersed in prop­
ositions with their subject and predicate, in syllogisms, and in the
problem of finding the middle term. Just five years before, Llull
had written the Logica nova, in which he adapted the methods of
traditional logic to his own philosophical frame of reference. In
the Ars brevis he adapts it to the Art itself, in the sense of having
the mechanism of the Art function through, or in terms of, the
propositions and syllogisms so familiar to the schoolmen of his
day.22 Or to put it another way, the Art now became a method
for “finding” all the possible propositions and syllogisms on any
given subject and for verifying their truth or falsehood.23
As for the change from analogy to inclusion, the former reliance
on “simile, example, and metaphor”24 is replaced here by Lull’s
reassurances that “everything which exists is implicit in” such and
21 See E. Colomer’s balanced and penetrating article on this topic, “Ramon Llull, iprecursor de la Informatica?” CITEMA 81 (Madrid, 1979), 7-44, translated from Spanish into
Catalan and slightly modified as “De Ramon Llull a la moderna informatica,” EE 23 (1979),
113-35. This article was written to fill a gap in I. M. Bochenski’s A History ofFormal Logic,
of which Colomer complains that it “does not even mention the most original and prom­
ising aspect of Llull’s method, the outline of a combinatory technique contained in the
Fourth Figure. The same is true of the deeper significance of the Art as an ontological logic,
in the line of Plato and Hegel.” Cf. CITEMA, p. 12, and EL, pp. 115-16. Colomer’s
complaints might have been even louder had he used the English translation of Bochenski’s
work, whose section on Llull (pp. 272-3) is punctuated with howlers (gula, “gluttony”
translated as “throat”; circularis translated as “cruciform”; and so on), which at least serve
to make the English-speaking reader agree with Bochenski’s comment that “this text is far
from clear.”
22 The biggest changes in this direction would come in the post-Art phase; cf. “Llull’s
Thought,” text at n. 18 above.
23 It should be clearly understood that this involves no attempt on Llull’s part to treat
logic from the Aristotelian formalistic point of view, or even from the medieval linguistic
point of view (with its appellatio, suppositio, etc.); it rather involves using the Art as a way
of structuring, mechanizing, and “ontologizing” traditional logic.
24 Cf. the text corresponding to Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 39. Felix, nearly contem­
porary with the Ars demonstrativa, is composed almost entirely of examples; and “metaphor”
occupies all of Dist. x of the earlier Principles of Medicine.

576

ARS BREVIS

such a figure, that “whatever exists is reducible to the abovementioned principles,” how this Art is general and universal, and
how by its use the reader or practitioner can make his thought
general and universal.25 Where before he offered a looser, more
open-ended method of comparison, he is now giving a much tigh­
ter and more systematized method of invention, of “finding” the
right place within the structure to locate the answer to a question.26
As a result of this last change, the Art is now more explicit,
and hence, in spite of its extraordinary intricacy, more straight­
forward in its application. It is therefore easier to assimilate and
use. The above-mentioned open-endedness of the earlier Art,
where many aspects of its use were left up to the reader’s initiative,
where there was considerable fluidity in the application of similes,
examples, and metaphors, and where even many of Llull’s more
fully explained answers were only a shorthand or outline of all
the structures being referred to, is replaced by a technique where
the reader is led much more carefully by the hand and told much
more explicitly how and where to find his solutions. As a result,
it looks easier, and is easier, to understand and apply.

Manuscripts, Editions, and Translations
All these new aspects probably played their part in the great success
of the Ars brevis (as well as of its companion piece, the Ars generalis
ultima). In the most immediate sense, it brought Llull the recog­
nition he had sought so long: in February of 1310, during his
fourth and last visit to Paris, forty masters and bachelors in arts
and medicine signed a document attesting to the fact that they had
heard and approved of his lectures on the Ars brevis.27 The defeat
of twenty years earlier was now clearly reversed. Not long after
Llull’s death, his disciple Thomas le Myesier included a slightly
altered “anthologized” version of the work in the Breviculum, the
25 See for example Part n below, every section of which contains some statement to this
effect.
26 This does not mean, of course, that earlier phases of the Art had no pretensions to
generality, or that all use of analogy was banned from later formulations of the Art. The
change was one of basis and emphasis. The universality of this version of the Art, however,
was one of the things that most impressed Renaissance Lullists; see for example Agrippa
von Nettesheim’s remarks quoted in “Llull’s Influence," n. 49 above.
27 See the “Life,” § 42 and n. 169 there.

INTRODUCTION

577

only work of Llull’s to appear in that magnificent manuscript des­
tined for the queen of France.28
In subsequent centuries, no other work of Llull’s was so often
copied or commented. We possess, in fact, some seventy manu­
scripts of the Ars brevis.29 During the Renaissance, it was Llull’s
most famous work; of the twenty-three or twenty-four editions
in which it was printed, all but four appeared between 1481 and
1669.30 Moreover, either the Ars brevis or the version of the Art
represented by it together with the Ars generalis ultima was com­
mented on by Agrippa von Nettesheim, Giordano Bruno, and
Johann Heinrich Alsted.31 It was these works and commentaries
that made up the greater part of Zetzner’s anthology. In fact, Zetzner began his anthology with the Ars brevis, so for many seven­
teenth-century readers it provided their first contact with Ramon
Llull, as was certainly the case with the young Leibniz.32
After that, interest in the work—as in all of Llull’s works—
waned. Between 1669 and the present one finds only two editions
of 1744,33 a French translation published in 1901,34 and a Catalan
adaptation of 1934.35
Of modern studies of the work, three deserve mention. The
first is the combined analysis of the Ars brevis and the Ars generalis
ultima in Carreras y Artau’s great work.36 The second, which
would be of special interest for the English-speaking reader, is the
28 For the Breviculum, see “Lullism,” text at n. 23 above. For the version of the Ars brevis
it contains, see Hillg, pp. 447 and 239.
29 See the concluding bibliographical section (pp. 325-75) of Artus, Ars Brevis, and the
reprint of this section in EL 13 (1969), 153-81. He lists sixty-three mss, which from the
list in Madre’s forthcoming edition (see below) can be expanded to seventy.
30 Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 335-7, and EL 13 (1969), 161-3. Twenty-three if the first one
he lists (Barcelona, 1484) is an error for one he does not list (Barcelona, 1481; cf. RD 3);
twenty-four if they are different publications. For the four more recent editions, see below.
31 For these people, see “Lullism” pp. 81-3 above. For lists of manuscript and printed
commentaries on the Ars brevis, see Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 347ff., and EL 13 (1969), 173ff.
32 For the Zetzner editions and Leibniz, see “Lullism,” pp. 81-5 above.
33 The first of these is Opera Parva, Vol. I, containing six works of Ramon Llull; the
second is an offprint of the first (Palma, 1744; cf. RD 326), containing only the Ars brevis.
34 Raymond Lulle, Ars brevis (Paris, 1901). It claims to be the first translation into French,
but there was a seventeenth-century translation by a Seigneur de Vassy of which two mss
are still extant, and which was published in Paris in 1632: cf. RD 206, Artus, Ars Brevis,
pp. 334, 337, and EL 13 (1969), 160, 163, as well as Hillg, pp. 304—5.
35 Art breu. Versio catalana explicada i adaptada al lector modern per Mossen Joan Avinyo
(Barcelona, 1934). This is a free translation from the Latin, intermingled with explanatory
material; it bears no relation whatever to the two medieval Catalan mss mentioned below.
36 Ca i, 427-55.

578

ARS BREVIS

unpublished doctoral disseration by Walter W. Artus mentioned
above.37 The third, also mentioned above, is Eusebio Colomer’s
excellent article relating this version of the Art to modern logic
and computer science.38
In preparing this translation I have been most fortunate in being
able to use a typescript of the monumental critical edition of the
Latin text prepared by Alois Madre of the Raimundus-Lullus-Institut of Freiburg.39 This I compared with printed editions I
thought the modern reader might have occasion to consult.40 As
for translations, I have consulted the only two medieval Catalan
manuscripts,41 and both indeed seem to be translations from the
Latin done by later followers of Hull, and thus of limited interest
as sources of the text. The French version of 1901 was done by a
translator with little knowledge of Hull, and was therefore not
very useful; more useful was Avinyo’s Catalan adaptation of 1934.
37 Cf. n. 29 above.
38 Cf. n. 21 above.
39 For the loan of which it gives me great pleasure to thank Professor Madre and the
Institut. Thanks to Madre’s work, I have been able to base this translation on a text that
is both authoritative and free from Renaissance accretions.
40 This means the four Zetzner editions of 1598, 1609, 1617 and 1659 (cf. n. 32 above);
the Palma, 1669, edition with commentaries by Francisco Marfal (RD 264), which was
reprinted in Frankfurt (Minerva), 1970; and the two Palma, 1744, editions mentioned in
n. 33 above.
41 Both probably from the fifteenth century. The first is in Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana,
O. 87 sup., fols. 1-44, and the second in Palma, Franciscan Convent, cod. 11, fols. 1-13.
The latter was formerly in the Jesuit College of Montesion, hence the confusion of a sup­
posed third Catalan ms in Artus, Ars Brevis, p. 334, and EL 13 (1969), 160; cf. L. Perez in
EL 4 (1960), 206. The fourth ms listed by Artus as containing a Spanish translation of the
Ars brevis (Palma, Bibl. Publ., MS 999), in fact contains a Latin abstract of the work, and
a Spanish translation of the probably apocryphal Art of Confession', see Garcia Pastor, Hillgarth, and Perez Martinez, Manuscritos lulianos de la Biblioteca Ptiblica de Palma (BarcelonaPalma, 1965), pp. 104-5.

God, with the help of Your grace, wisdom, and love, here
begins the Ars brevis, which is a replica of the General Art, that
is, of the work beginning “God, with the help of Your supreme
perfection, here begins the Ars generalis ultima.”'

PROLOGUE
We

have written this Ars brevis so that the Ars magna may be more
easily understood. For once the former is understood, the latter, along
with the other Arts, can be easily understood and learned.
The subject of this Art is the answering of all questions, assuming
that one can identify them by name.12
This book is divided into thirteen parts, just like the Ars magna.3
The first part concerns the Alphabet. The second, the Figures. The
third, the Definitions. The fourth, the Rules. The fifth, the Table. The
sixth, the Evacuation of the Third Figure. The seventh, the Multipli­
cation of the Fourth Figure. The eighth, the Mixture of Principles and
Rules. The ninth, the Nine Subjects. The tenth, Application. The elev­
enth, Questions. The twelfth, Habituation. The thirteenth, the way the
Art should be taught.
And now we will begin by discussing the first part.
1 The phrase inside quotation marks is, verbatim, the incipit of the Ars generalis ultima. For the
Ars brevis as an abbreviation of and introduction to the Ars generalis ultima, see Ca I, 428, as well
as n. 3 below.
2 That is to say, assuming that one knows under which of the ten general questions (see Part
iv below) any particular question should be classified. The point is more clearly made in the
corresponding passage of the Proemium of the Ars generalis ultima. This is, of course, the point of
an art that is inventiva; cf. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. in, n. 16.
3 These “parts” correspond exactly, which greatly facilitates cross-consultation. Note that
throughout the Ars brevis Llull almost always refers to the Ars generalis ultima as the Ars magna.

PART I, WHICH TREATS
OF THE ALPHABET OF
THIS ART
We

have employed an alphabet in this Art so that it can be used
to make figures, as well as to mix principles and rules for the
purpose of investigating the truth. For, as a result of any one letter
having many meanings, the intellect becomes more general in its
reception of the things signified, as well as in acquiring knowledge.
And this alphabet must be learned by heart, for otherwise the artist
will not be able to make proper use of this Art.

THE ALPHABET'
B signifies goodness, difference, whether?, God, justice, and av­
arice.
C signifies greatness, concordance, what?, angel, prudence, and
gluttony.
D signifies eternity or duration,12 contrariety, of what?, heaven,
fortitude, and lust.
E signifies power, beginning, why?, man, temperance, and
pride.
F signifies wisdom, middle, how much?, imaginative, faith, and
accidie.
G signifies will, end, of what kind?, sensitive, hope, and envy.
H signifies virtue, majority, when?, vegetative, charity, and ire.
I signifies truth, equality, where?, elementative, patience, and
lying.
K signifies glory, minority, how and with what?, instrumentative, pity, and inconstancy.
1 For the changes between this Alphabet and that of the Ars demonstrativa, see Introduc­
tion, text at nn. 10 and 11 above; for its development within the ternary phase of the Art,
see above Introduction, n. 17.
2 Some of the mss and all of the printed sources consulted have just “duration.” These
two concepts are interchangeable in this slot of Figure A, which does not mean that they
are synonymous, except as an attribute of God. Cf. Felix, Bk. vm, n. 98.

w

PART I

581

TABLE 6. THE ALPHABET OF THE ARS BREVIS.
Fig. A

P'S- T

B
C
D
E

goodness

F

wisdom

difference
concordance
contrariety
beginning
middle

greatness

eternity*

power

G will

H virtue
I truth
K glory

end
majority
equality
minority

Questions
and Rulesj-

whether?

what?
of what?

why?
how much?
of what kind?
when?
where?
how? and
with what?

Subjects

God
angel
heaven
man
imaginative
sensitive
vegetative
elementative
instrumentative

Virtues
justice
prudence
fortitude
temperance

faith
hope
charity
patience

P'ty

Vices
avarice

gluttony
lust
pride
accidie
envy
ire
lying
inconstancy

★ or duration
f See Part iv, n. 1, for the original Latin terms and their relationship to the equivalent
“rules.”

PART II, WHICH TREATS
OF THE FOUR FIGURES
1. THE FIRST FIGURE, DENOTED BY A
This Part is divided into four sections, one for each of the four
figures. The First Figure is that of A, and it contains nine prin­
ciples, to wit, goodness, greatness, etc.,1 and nine letters, to wit,
B, C, D, E, etc. This figure is circular to show that any subject
can become a predicate and vice versa, as when one says, “good­
ness is great,” “greatness is good,” and so on.2 In this figure,
moreover, the artist seeks the natural conjunction between subject
and predicate,3 as well as their relative disposition and proportion,
so that he can find the middle term and thus reach a conclusion.
Each principle, taken by itself, is completely general, as when
one says “goodness” or “greatness.” However, as soon as one
principle is applied to4 another, then it is subordinate, as when we
say “great goodness.” And when some principle is applied to a
singular thing, then it is completely particular, as when we say
“Peter’s goodness is great.” And thus the intellect has a ladder for
ascending and descending; as, for instance, descending from a
completely general principle to one neither completely general nor
completely particular, and from a principle neither completely
general nor completely particular to one that is completely par1 l.e., the nine dignities listed in the previous Alphabet, which are those used throughout
the ternary phase of the Art; cf. “Llull’s Thought,” n. 29 above. For a general discussion
of Figure A and the dignities in this phase, see Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 121ff.
2 Once again the convertibility of the dignities; see Ars demonstrativa, Dist. i, n. 6, for
references.
3 Note how this phrase is identical with what is defined as the activity of a logician in
Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 87 below, and how it is couched in terms identical with
the new definition of “conjunctive middle” of Figure T, sec. 2 below. For the problem of
finding the middle term mentioned towards the end of this sentence, see the Introduction
above, and Johnston, Semblance, pp. 218-22.
4 Contrahitur could also be translated as “joined or combined with”; cf. Taula d’esta Art,
ORL xvn, 391, s.v. contraccio. It is opposed to “abstraction” (cf. Art amativa, ORL xvn,
66—9), and carries with it an idea of “contraction, ” as Llull points out in the Ars generalis
ultima (Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 87 on Logic) when he says that abstract “goodness”
by itself is completely general, but when it is “joined” to a predicate, as in the expression
“goodness is great,” it is less general, and less general still if the predicate itself is less
general, as in “the goodness of (a) man.” Cf. Pla I, 257-60, 305.

Plate XV. Ars brevis, The First Figure.
From Escorial, Ms f-iv-12, fol. 3.

Plate XVIII. Ars brevis, The Fourth Figure.
From Escorial, Ms f-iv-12, fol. 7.

PART II

583

ticular.5 And in a similar fashion one can discuss the ascent of this
ladder.
Everything that exists is implicit in the principles of this figure,
for everything is either good or great, etc., as God and angels,
which are good, great, etc. Therefore, whatever exists is reducible
to the above-mentioned principles.6

2. THE SECOND FIGURE, DENOTED BY T
The Second Figure goes under the name of T, and it contains
three triangles,7 each of which is general and all-embracing.
1. The first triangle consists of difference, concordance and con­
trariety, and it comprises everything which exists, according to
its category. For everything which exists is either in difference,
concordance or contrariety, and outside of these principles nothing
can be found.
One must know, moreover, that each angle of this triangle has
three species. For there is a difference between sensual and sensual,
as for instance between a stone and a tree. There is also a difference
between the sensual and the intellectual, as for instance between
body and soul. And there is furthermore a difference between
intellectual and intellectual, as between soul and God, between the
soul and an angel,8 between one angel and another, or between
God and an angel. And the same can be said for concordance and
contrariety, each in its own way. And this difference existing in
each angle of this triangle is the ladder by which the intellect as­
cends and descends, so that it can find the natural middle term9
between subject and predicate, with which middle term it can
5 Many of the printed texts have truncated the part of the sentence following the semi­
colon to, “from a completely general principle to one not completely general, and from
one not completely particular to one completely particular.” For the subject of the ascent
and descent of the intellect so important to Llull, see “Llull’s Thought,” n. 58.
6 Cf. introduction, text preceding n. 25 above.
7 As opposed to the five triangles of the Ars demonstrativa; cf. introduction, n. 11 above,
as well as my “Cronologia,” pp. 40-3. Here (as opposed to the Ars generalis ultima, to say
nothing of the Ars demonstrativa) there is no mention of the different colors for each triangle.
For general discussions of Figure T, see Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 173ffi, and the references
in Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 15.
8 “Between the soul and an angel” is missing in the printed sources consulted.
9 Yet another translation of medium (Cat. mija)—c(. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 16—
this one related, as its context makes clear, to the passage commented in n. 3 above.

584

ARS BREVIS

reach a conclusion. And the same is true for the ladder of con­
cordance and contrariety, each in its own way.
2. The second triangle consists of beginning, middle, and end,
and it comprises everything that exists. For everything that exists
is either in beginning, middle, or end, and outside of these prin­
ciples nothing can be found.
The word “cause” written in the angle of “beginning” stands
for the efficient, material, formal, and final cause. The words
“quantity” and “time” refer to the other nine predicaments, and
to those things that can be reduced to them.10
The angle of “middle” contains three species of middle. First
there is the conjunctive middle, which exists between subject and
predicate, as when we say, “man is an animal.”11 For between
man and animal there are middle terms, such as their life and body,
without which man would not be an animal. Then there is the
middle of mensuration, which refers to the act existing between
the doer and the doable,12 like loving between the lover and the
lovable. And then there is the middle between extremes, like a
line between two points. And this angle of “middle” acts as a
general ladder with respect to the intellect.
The angle of “end” also contains three species. The first is the
end of privation, which refers to a privative state13 and to those
things that are in the past.14 The second species is the end of ter­
mination, which refers to the extremities, like the two points that
terminate a line, or like the lover and beloved in relation to loving.
The third species is the end of perfection, which refers to ultimate
purpose, like man, who exists to multiply his species, and to un­
derstand, love, and remember God, and so forth. This angle also
acts as a general ladder with respect to the intellect.
10 The “predicaments” are, of course, the Aristotelian categories. Notice how this de­
scription is similar to the corresponding passage in the Ars demonstrativa (cf. Dist. I, n. 19),
but more specific and explicit.
11 Cf. n. 3 above. This intrusion of logic into Figure T is something quite new with the
Ars brevis (it is not even present in the corresponding passage of the Ars generalis ultima that
was probably written some years earlier). For a comparison of how the “conjunctive mid­
dle” was treated in earlier works of the Art, see the Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 20.
12 Inter agentem et agibile. This relating of Figure T with the correlative doctrine, as in
the second species of “end” below, is another innovation of the Ars brevis; cf. again Ars
demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 20.
13 Thus habitum privativum in the mss, and not habitum privatum as in most of the printed
sources.
14 The printed texts and a few of the mss add, “like death which ends life.”

PART II

585

3. The third triangle is made up of majority, equality, and mi­
nority, and it is general and all-embracing in its way. For whatever
exists is either in majority, equality, or minority. Majority has
three species. The first is when there exists majority between sub­
stance and substance, as, for instance, the substance of heaven,
which is greater than the substance of fire. The second species is
when there exists majority between substance and accident, like
a substance that is greater than its quantity; for substance exists
of itself, which is something no accident does. The third species
is when there exists majority between accident and accident, like
understanding, which is greater than seeing, and seeing than run­
ning.15 And what we have said about majority applies equally to
minority, since they are correlative to one another.
The angle of equality has three species. The first is when things
are substantially equal, like Peter and Martin, who are equal in
substance. The second species is when substance and accident are
regarded as equal to one another, such as substance and its quan­
tity. The third species is when there is equality between accident
and accident, like understanding and loving, which are equal in
their object. And this angle is a ladder by which the intellect can
ascend and descend, as was said of the other triangles. And when
the intellect ascends to general objects, then it itself becomes gen­
eral; and when it descends to particulars, then it itself becomes
particular.
The Figure T serves the First Figure, for through difference one
can distinguish between goodness and goodness, between good­
ness and greatness,16 etc. And by joining this figure to the first,
the intellect acquires knowledge. And because this figure is gen­
eral, therefore the intellect becomes general.

3. THE THIRD FIGURE
The Third Figure is a composite of the first and second; for the
letter B that appears in it stands for the B that is in both the first
and second figures; and similarly for the other letters.
15 Thus in the printed sources and some of the mss; other mss, instead of “running,”
have “believing.”
16 Thus in most sources; the Zetzner editions, however, have “greatness and greatness”
for this pair.

ARS BREVIS

586

This one consists of 36 compartments,17 as can be seen in the
illustration. Each compartment has many different meanings as a
result of the two letters it contains. Thus the compartment of B
C has many different meanings as a result of B C, and similarly
the compartment of B D has many different meanings as a result
of B D, and so on.18 And this should be clear from the alphabet
we gave above.
Each compartment contains two letters, and these represent sub­
ject and predicate, between which the artist seeks the middle term
that will join them, like goodness and greatness that are joined
through concordance, and similarly for other terms. With this
middle term the artist tries to reach a conclusion and state a prop­
osition.
This figure is meant to show that any principle can be attributed
to any of the others: thus to B we can attribute C, D, etc., and
to C we can attribute B, D, etc., as can be seen from the illus­
tration. This is so that the intellect may know each principle in
terms of all the others, and be enabled to deduce many arguments
from a single proposition.
To give an example with “goodness,” we make it into a subject
and use the other principles as predicates, giving:
goodness is great
goodness is enduring
goodness is powerful

goodness
goodness
goodness
goodness

is
is
is
is

different
concordant
contrary
beginning

17 Combination without repetition of 9 elements taken two at a time, hence

In appearance it is like one of the second figures of the Ars demonstrativa; but in function
it is quite different. It is no longer merely a second way of representing a first figure, but
it is now a composite figure and hence much more general, as will become clear from the
explanations that follow. Notice also how in the Ars demonstrativa we have combinations
with, and here without, repetitions. For general considerations on the Third Figure, see:
Ca I, 433-4; Pla I, 304-5; and Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 217ff. This figure remained unchanged
throughout the ternary phase of the Art.
18 In the Lectura super Artem inventivam et Tabulam generalem, MOG v, 402 = Int. v, 44,
Llull is more explicit: “Each compartment has six meanings, like the compartment of B
C, which signifies Goodness, Greatness, Difference, Concordance, First and Second Rule,
and like the compartment of B D, which signifies Goodness, Duration, Difference, Con­
trariety, First and Third Rule, and so on for the others,” which is followed by a detailed
interpretation of each compartment.

PART II

goodness
goodness
goodness
goodness
goodness

587

is
is
is
is
is

knowable
lovable
virtuous
true
glorious

goodness
goodness
goodness
goodness
goodness

is
is
is
is
is

mediating
ending
magnifying
equalizing
lessening

What we have said of goodness can be applied equally well to
the other principles, each in its own way.
This figure is very general, and by using it the intellect is made
very general in acquiring knowledge.
It is a condition of this figure that one compartment not be
contrary to another, but that they be concordant in their conclu­
sion. Thus the compartment of B C should not be contrary to
that of B D, and so on for the others.19 With such a condition,
the intellect is conditioned to the acquisition of knowledge.

4. THE FOURTH FIGURE
The Fourth Figure has three circles, the outermost of which is
fixed and the two inside ones of which are mobile, as appears in
the illustration.20 The middle circle revolves on top of the outer
fixed circle, so that, for instance, C can be put opposite B. The
innermost circle revolves on the middle circle, so that, for instance,
D can be put opposite C. And in this way 9 compartments are
formed at a time, one being BCD, another C D E, and so on.
After that, E of the smaller circle can be put opposite C of the
middle one, with which another 9 compartments are formed.
When all the letters of the smallest circle have been brought op­
posite B on the largest circle and C on the middle circle, then C
is the middle term between B and D, since B and D are related
to one another through the meanings of C. And the same is true
of the other compartments. And thus by means of these com­
partments, one may seek out necessary conclusions and find them.
19 The Zetzner editions leave out “should not be contrary to that of B D,” leaving a
text one would have to translate as, “in their conclusion, like the compartment of B C,
and so on for the others. ” This changes a prohibition between compartments to one between
components within compartments.
20 For this Fourth Figure, which is basically a very modified version of the First Dem­
onstrative Figure of the Ars demonstrativa, see: Ca I, 434-5; Pla I, 308-11; and Artus, Ars
Brevis, pp. 227ff.

588

ARS BREVIS

After that, we can bring all the letters opposite the B of the
largest circle and D of the middle circle, and so on for all the letters
of the middle and smallest circle, by rotating them, with the B of
the largest circle remaining immobile, until we arrive at a position
with B on the largest circle, I on the middle one, and K on the
innermost; and this will make a total of 252 compartments.21
This figure is more general than the third, because in each com­
partment of this figure there are three letters, whereas in each
compartment of the Third Figure there are only two. Thus the
intellect is rendered more general as a result of the Fourth Figure
than as a result of the Third.22
The condition of the Fourth Figure is that the intellect must
apply to a proposition those letters that are most applicable to it.
And once the compartment has been formed from three letters,
it must grasp the meanings of the letters, keeping in mind the
agreement between subject and predicate and avoiding disagree­
ment. And with this condition, the intellect can acquire knowledge
by means of the Fourth Figure, and can form many arguments
toward a single conclusion.

So much for the four figures, which the artist must learn by
heart, for without them he cannot use or practice this Art.
21 Llull is saying that with the outer wheel remaining fixed, we can place opposite the
B on that wheel all the possible 2-letter permutations of the remaining 8 letters of his
alphabet, which gives

usable positions of the two inner wheels (i.e., without repetitions of letters). Now since
in any one position we can read off 9 compartments between the linked-up spokes, as it
were, this gives us a total of 28 x 9 = 252 compartments. This does, however, involve
repetitions; in fact, each compartment is repeated three times, since B C D = C DB (which
appears when C K are lined up under B) = D B C (which appears when I K are lined up
under B). For Llull’s combinatorial purposes here, however, this is unimportant. In the
table in Part v he has eliminated the superfluous combinations, giving 252 3 = 84 columns
(see n. 3 there).
22 Marfal (see introduction, n. 40 above) in his commentary on this passage quotes the
statement from Llull’s Art amativa (ORL xvn, 22) that “the entire Art is contained in this
Fourth Figure.”

PART III, WHICH TREATS
OF DEFINITIONS OF THE
PRINCIPLES
In

this Art, the principles thereof are defined, so that they may
be known by said definitions, and so that one may use them,
affirming or denying in such a way that the definitions remain
unimpaired. With such conditions, the intellect acquires knowl­
edge, discovers middle terms, and dispels ignorance, which is its
enemy.
1. Goodness is that thing by reason of which good does good.1
2. Greatness is that by reason of which goodness, duration, etc.
are great.2
3. Eternity or duration3 is that by reason of which goodness,
etc. endure.
4. Power is that by reason of which goodness, etc. can exist
and act.
5. Wisdom is that by reason of which the wise man understands.
6. Will is that by reason of which goodness, greatness, etc. are
lovable or desirable.4
1 The printed sources, along with two mss, add, “and thus good is being and evil is
nonbeing,” for which see “Llull’s Thought,” text at n. 66 above. For the introduction of
these definitions into the Art, see introduction, text at n. 14 above; and for the reasons for
their being given in terms of functionality (“in terms of a power and its specific act”) rather
than in traditional Aristotelian terms of genus and species, see Part xi, ch. 6, Question 2,
and ch. 2, Question 3 below, as well as “Llull’s Thought,” n. 46 above. Llull was aware
of the opposition these definitions aroused; most of the equivalent Part in of the Ars generalis
ultima is taken up with a defense of this doctrine, ending on an uncharacteristically angry
note against those who with “a dog’s fangs and a serpent’s tongue scorn and slander our
principles and their definitions.” As for the definitions of these eighteen basic principles,
they appear in every work of the Art of the ternary phase, and usually with almost identical
wording; in seven works, moreover, they are accorded extensive commentaries. These are:
the Ars inventiva veritatis (MOG v, 3-12), Art amativa (ORL xvn, 89-150); Arbre defilosofia
desiderat (ORL xvn, 410-17); Taula general (ORL xvi, 312-36); Lectura super Artem inventivam et Tabulam generalem (MOG v, 370-401 = Int. v, 12-43); Tree of Science (OE I, 55762); and Brevis practica Tabulae generalis (MOG v, 303-7 = Int. iii, 3-7). See also Pla I,
129ff., and Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 245ff.
2 The printed sources and one ms add, “and it encompasses all the farthest reaches of
being.”
1 The printed sources and three mss omit “eternity or” (cf. Part I, n. 2 above).
4 The printed sources omit “lovable or.”

590

AKS BREVIS

7. Virtue is the origin of the union of goodness, greatness, and
the other principles.5
8. Truth is that which is true concerning goodness, greatness,
etc.
9. Glory is that bliss in which goodness, greatness, etc. come
to rest.
10. Difference is that by reason of which goodness, etc. are
clearly distinguishable from one another.
11. Concordance is that by reason of which goodness, etc. ac­
cord in one or in several things.
12. Contrariety is the mutual opposition of certain things as a
result of different goals.
13. Beginning is that which is found in everything where there
is any question of priority.
14. Middle is the subject through which end influences begin­
ning, and beginning reinfluences end, and thus it participates in
the nature of both.
15. End is that in which beginning comes to rest.
16. Majority is the image of the immensity of goodness, great­
ness, etc.
17. Equality is the subject in which the end of concordance,
goodness, etc. comes to rest.
18. Minority is the thing close to nothingness.
So much for definitions of the principles, which must be learned
by heart; for without knowing these definitions, the Art is unteachable.6
5 For this linking of the concepts of “virtue” and “unity,” see Pla I, 113, 183.
6 Cf. Rossi, “Legacy,” p. 198.

PART IV, WHICH TREATS
OF RULES
The

rules of this Art consist of ten general questions, to which

all other possible questions can be reduced. They are the following

B.
C.
D.
E.
F.

Whether a thing is.
What is it?
Of what is it?
Why is it?
How much is it?

G. Of what kind is it?
H. When is it?
I. Where is it?
K-l. How is it?
K-2. With what is it?1

Each of these questions is divisible into various species.
B. “Whether” has three species, to wit, dubitative, affirmative
and negative, so that, from the outset, the intellect assumes either
side to be possible, and does not bind itself to believing, which is
not as natural to it as is understanding. And thus it must take that
side with which it has the greatest understanding, which side must
be that of truth.2
C. “What?” has four species:
’ These ten Rules or Questions first appeared in the Taula general of 1293-4 (cf. intro­
duction, text at n. 19 above), and they were reproduced almost verbatim in the Arbre de
Jilosofia desiderat of the same year of 1294 (see Part iv of my “Notes” for the problem of
the chronology of these two works, the second of which has usually been assigned a date
four or five years earlier). From then on no work of the Art is without them. Those works
which, in addition to the two already mentioned, contained more extended explanations
of the Rules are: Lectura super Artem inventivam et Tabulam generalem (MOG v, 360—7 =
Int. v, 2-9); Logica nova (Palma, 1744, pp. 11-18); Brevis practica Tabulae generalis (MOG
v, 307-11 = Int. iii, 7-11); and Liber de praedicatione (ROL in, 168-74)—to say nothing
of the section corresponding to this in the Ars generalis ultima. As given, for example, in
this last work, the list of rules with their corresponding questions is as follows:
B. possibilitas—utrum?; C. quidditas—quid?; D. materialitas—de quo?; E. formalitas—quare?;
F. quantitas—quantum?; G. qualitas—qualis?; H. tempus—quando?; I. locus—ubi?; K1. modalitas-—quotnodo?; K-2. instrumentalitas—cum quo? Note that in order to accommodate
ten rules to a nine-letter alphabet, Hull has had to put two rules in the last slot. For the
complicated relation between these rules, the Aristotelian and scholastic topics, the Aris­
totelian categories, and earlier partial formulations on Llull’s part, see Pla I, 261ff., and
especially 275ff. It is curious to note that Giordano Bruno in his De lampade combinatoria
lulliana (Zetzner, Strasbourg, 1617), p. 705, refers to these ten questions as the “syncategoremata” of the Art, in opposition to the “categoremata” of Figures A and T. Marpal in
his edition of the Ars brevis (see introduction, n. 40 above) has an interesting scholium on
the double nature of these questions (referring to the unknown or doubtful) and rules
(referring to methods of argumentation or teaching).
2 The three “species” of this question correspond to the lost black triangle of Figure T
(cf. Introduction, n. 11 above).

592

ARS BREVIS

1. The first is definitional, as when one asks, What is the in­
tellect? To which one must reply that it is that power whose
function it is to understand.
2. The second species is when one asks, What does the intellect
have coessentially in itself?3 To which one must reply that
it has its correlatives, that is to say, intellective, intelligible,
and understanding,4 without which it could not exist, and
would, moreover, be idle and lack nature, purpose, and re­
pose.
3. The third species is when one asks, What is the intellect in
something other than itself? To which one must reply that
it is good when understanding in goodness, great when un­
derstanding in greatness, etc.; and grammatical in grammar,
logical in logic, rhetorical in rhetoric, etc.
4. The fourth species is when one asks, What does a thing have
in another thing? As when one asks, What does the intellect
have in another thing? To which one must reply, In knowl­
edge understanding and in faith belief.
D. The rule “Of what?” has three species:
1. The first is the original meaning, as when one says, Of what
is the intellect? To which one must reply, Of itself, since it
is not naturally derived from some other general thing.
2. The second species is when one inquires specifically, What
is a thing composed of? As when one asks, What is the in­
tellect composed of? To which one must reply that it is com­
posed of its own specific matter and form, with which it
achieves specific understanding.5
3. The third species is when one asks, Whose is a thing? As
when one asks, Whose is the intellect? To which one must
reply that it is man’s, as a part belongs to the whole, and a
horse to its master.
3 The Ars generalis ultima has “essentially and naturally” instead of “coessentially.”
4 Intellectivum, intelligibile et intelligere. One of the few direct uses of the correlative doc­
trine in the Ars brevis. See T. Carreras i Artau, “El llenguatge filosofic de Ramon Llull,”
EUC 21 (1936), 547, n. 8, where this passage is commented. Artus, Ars Brevis, p. 275,
paraphrases: “the intellect as power, an intelligible nature [‘object’ would have closer to
the normal Lullian terminology; cf. Part x, “Hundred Forms," no. 78 below], and the act
of understanding which links the first two and completes the essence of the intellect.”
5 The different version of this last sentence in the Ars generalis ultima helps to explain
Llull’s meaning: “To which one must reply that it is composed of its own essential prin­
ciples, that is to say, its intellective, intelligible and understanding. And similarly with man
who is made up of his body and his soul, with a nail which is of iron, and so on.”

PART IV

593

E. The fourth rule6 has two species, to wit, formal and final.
1. The formal aspect is when one asks, Why does a thing exist?
As when one asks, Why does the intellect exist? To which
one must reply that it is because of its specific matter and
form, with which it has a specific understanding and with
which it acts in accordance with its own species.
2. The second species is with respect to end, as when one asks,
Why does the intellect exist? To which one must reply, So
that objects may be intelligible, or, So that one may have
knowledge of things.
F. The fifth rule asks about quantity, and has two species:7
1. The first is what one inquires about continuous quantity, as
when one says, How much intellect is there? To which one
must reply that there is as much as there can be through
spiritual quantity, and this quantity has nothing to do with
points or lines.
2. The second species is when one inquires about discrete quan­
tity, as when one says, How much intellect is there? To which
one must reply that there is as much as the amount of its
correlatives, by which8 it is diffused and sustained, that is to
say, the intellective, intelligible, and understanding, with
which it operates theoretically and practically, with respect
to the general and the particular.
G. The sixth rule concerns quality, and it has two species:
1. The first is when one asks, What is the characteristic and
primary quality of intellect? To which one must reply, The
intelligibility with which it is clothed. Extrinsic understand­
ing is a secondary and more distant property, with which
the intellect understands a man, a lion, etc. It is of this that
the intrinsic and substantial understanding of the intellect is
clothed, and similarly for what is extrinsically intelligible.
2. The second species is when one inquires about appropriated
quality, as9 when one asks, What is an appropriated quality
6 The printed sources add “of why?” The two species are further clarified in the Taula
general (ORL xvi, 341), where Llull says they involve asking respectively “why things
exist, and why they do what they do.” In the corresponding section of the Ars generalis
ultima he says one is per existentiam and the other per agentiam.
7 Quantity reappears in Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 16.
8 The printed sources and many mss have “in which.”
9 “When one inquires about appropriated quality, as” is missing in the printed sources
consulted.

594

ARS BREVIS

of the intellect? To which one must reply, Believing, doubt­
ing, or supposing. For these acts are not those of the intellect
proper, but of the understanding.
H. The seventh rule inquiries about time, and it has fifteen spe­
cies signified by the rules of C, D, K, as is pointed out in the Ars
magna.10 But since this Art is brief, we must discuss this rule in
few words, as when we ask, In what way does the intellect exist
in time, if it is not made up of points and lines? To which one
must reply that the intellect exists in time because it had a begin­
ning and because it consists of temporal succession, by means of
the motion of the body to which it is attached.11
I. The eighth rule inquires about place, and it has fifteen species
signified by the rules of C, D, K, as is pointed out in the Ars
magna.12 Thus when one asks, Where is the intellect, one can an­
swer briefly that it is in the subject in which it is, like a part in
the whole, not however confined but rather diffused in it, for the
essence of intellect has nothing to do with point, line, or surface.
K contains two rules, namely of modality and instrumentality.
K-l. The modal rule has four species, as when one asks (1) How
does the intellect exist?13 (2) How does one part exist in another?14
(3) How do the parts exist in the whole, and the whole in its parts?
and (4) How does it transmit its likeness outside itself? To which
one must reply that subjectively it exists in the manner already
determined through the above-mentioned species. Objectively,15
it understands by finding the middle term existing between subject
and predicate designated by the figures, and by multiplying alien
10 See the corresponding section of the Ars generalis ultima as well as the Logica nova
(Palma, 1744), p. 15, where Llull explains that these species correspond to the 4 of the
second rule (C), the 3 of the third (D), the 4 of the ninth (K-l) and the 4 of the tenth (K2). For example, the questions based on C he formulates as, “When is the intellect?” “When
does the intellect exist coessentially in itself?” etc.; those based on D as, “What is time
composed of?” etc.; and so on for the other two rules. He admits, however, that “it is
very difficult for the intellect to understand time” by means of these 15 species.
” This example is from the ninth rule [K-l]; cf. the corresponding part of theArs generalis
ultima.
12 See the references under n. 10 above. The distribution is presumably the same here.
13 Quomodo est intellects? Literally, “How is the intellect?” The Ars generalis ultima phrases
it as, “How does a thing exist in itself?” In the version of the Ars brevis appearing in the
Breviculum (fol. 35r) and in the Logica nova (Palma, 1744), p. 17, it appears as, “How does
a part exist as a part?”
14 Literally, “How is a part in a part?”
15 The “objectively” is missing in the printed sources and in many mss.

PART IV

595

species abstracted from sense and imagination, which are char­
acterized and understood in its own intelligible faculty.
K-2. The second rule of K has four species, as when one asks,
(1) With what does the intellect exist? (2) With what does one part
exist in another? (3) With what do the parts exist in the whole,
and the whole in its parts? and (4) With what does it transmit its
likeness outside itself?16 To which one must reply that it exists
with its correlatives, without which it can neither exist nor un­
derstand. And it understands with alien species, from which it
fashions an instrument for understanding.

So much for the rules with which the intellect solves questions,
which it doe.s by reducing them by means of rules; by keeping in
mind what a rule and its species means subjectively;17 by having
the intellect discard whatever question is dubious as a result of
applying the definitions of principles; by choosing and by under­
standing intelligibly the affirmative or negative side of the ques­
tion; and this so that the intellect be removed from doubt.
• 16 Note the exact parallelism between these four species and those of the first rule of K.
17 After this the original adds another “by reducing a question by means of principles
and rules,” which seems redundant.

PART V, WHICH TREATS
OF THE TABLE'
This table is the subject in which the intellect becomes universal,
because by said table it understands and abstracts many particulars
on all matters, with the principles surveying the particulars ob­
jectively, and the rules subjectively.2 And this it does by applying
to each question twenty arguments to explain said question, one
argument being extracted from each compartment of a given col­
umn.
The table, as one can see, has 7 columns, in which the 84 col­
umns of the Ars magna are implicit. In this table T means that the
letters which come before it belong to the First Figure, and those
after it to the Second Figure.3
1 The tabula (Cat. taula), which is derived directly from the Fourth Figure (cf. n. 3 below),
first appeared in the Taula general of 1293-4. After that it appeared in its full form only in
the Ars compendiosa (ed. Ottaviano, pp. 118-30) and in the Ars generalis ultima. It had a
precursor in the ternary combinations of Conditions (cf. Introduction, text at n. 18 above),
of the Ars inventiva veritatis (MOG v, 14-36), and the Art amativa (MOG vi, 64-90 = Int.
ii, 58-96; I cite this edition because the equivalent passage in the Catalan edition, ORL
xvii, 154ff. is lacking the combinatory letter notation which shows the relationship to the
table).
2 For the earlier intelligit, “understands,” many mss have colligit, “gathers, brings to­
gether.” The phrase “and the rules subjectively” is missing in the Zetzner editions.
3 As Llull says here, this table is an abbreviation or sample of the larger one in the Ars
generalis ultima. The latter is engendered by the machinery of the Fourth Figure, but omitting
the repetitions, which gives us

compartments (cf. Part ii, n. 21). For these compartments, see: Giordano Bruno, De lulliano
specierum scrutinio (Zetzner, Strasbourg, 1617), pp. 670-1; and Agrippa von Nettesheim,
In Artem brevem (ed. cit), pp. 841-9; as well as Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 285-7. Llull then
takes each of these compartments and sets it at the head of a column containing further
variations achieved by distinguishing the letters referring to Figure A from those referring
to Figure T. If for a moment we do this by using upper case for the former and lower case
for the latter, instead of putting the letter T between them as Llull does, it will become
clear that the first column, for instance, consists of all the permutations of the six letters
B D C b c d taken three at a time, or

giving us the number of triads in each column. We thus have a total of 1,680 compartments.
Now for the Ars brevis, Llull just takes 7 of the 84 columns of the larger table. He chooses
them by taking the first of the 28 starting with B, the first of the 21 starting with C, etc.,
ending with the one starting with H (cf. the passages cited from Bruno—the Ars brevis
uses the first element of each “domus”—Agrippa, and Artus).

PART V

597

By means of this table the intellect is ascendant and descendant.
It is ascendant when it ascends to things that are prior and more
general, and descendant when it descends to things that are pos­
terior and particular. And in addition it is connective, since it can
connect columns, as, for instance, the column of B C D with that
of C D E, and so on.

The Table
BCD

CDE

DEF

EFG

FGH

GHI

HIK

BCTB

CDTC

DETD

EFTE

FGTF

GHTG

HITH

BCTC

CDTD

DETE

EFTF

FGTG

GHTH

HITI

BCTD

CDTE

DETF

EFTG

FGTH

GHTI

HITK

BDTB

CETC

D FTD

EGTE

FHTF

GITG

HKTH

BDTC

CETD

DFTE

EGTF

FHTG

GITH

HKTI

BDTD

CETE

DFTF

EGTG

FHTH

GITI

HKTK

BTBC

CTCD

DTDE

ETEF

FTFG

GTGH

HTHI

BTB D

CTCE

DTD F

ETEG

FTFH

GTGI

HTHK

BTC D

CTDE

DTE F

ETFG

FTGH

GTHI

HTIK

CDTB

DETC

EFTD

FGTE

GHTF

HITG

IKTH

CDTC

DETD

EFTE

FGTF

GHTG

HIT H

IKTI

CDTD

DETE

EFTF

FGTG

GHTH

HITI

IKTK

CTB C

D TC D

ETDE

FTEF

GTFG

HTGH

ITHI

CTB D

DTCE

ETDF

FTEG

GTFH

HTGI

ITHK

CTCD

DTDE

ETEF

FTFG

GTGH

HTHI

ITIK

DTBC

ETC D

FTDE

GTEF

HTFG

ITGH

KTHI

DTBD

ETCE

F T D F*

GTEG

HTFH

ITGI

KTHK

DTCD

ETDE

FTEF

GTFG

HTGH

ITHI

KTIK

TB CD

TCDE

TD EF

TE FG

TFGH

TGH I

THIK

PART VI, WHICH TREATS
OF THE EVACUATION OF
THE THIRD FIGURE
The

intellect evacuates the compartments of the Third Figure

by extracting from them as much as it can, taking from each com­
partment those things that the letters signify, so as to apply the
things signified to the proposition, and it thus becomes applicative,
investigative, and inventive. We will give an example of this in
one compartment, and the others are to be dealt with in similar
fashion.
From the compartment of B C the intellect draws forth 12 prop­
ositions by saying:
goodness
goodness
goodness
greatness
greatness
greatness

is
is
is
is
is
is

great
different
concordant
good
different
concordant

difference is good
difference is great
difference is concordant
concordance is good
concordance is great
concordance is different12

And having formed these 12 propositions by changing subject into
predicate and conversely, the compartment is evacuated of these
propositions.
Then it is evacuated of 12 middle terms. And they are called
middle terms because they are placed between subject and pred­
icate, with which they accord in genus or species. And with these
middle terms, the intellect can become disputative and determi­
native. Thus, for instance, one can say, Everything which is mag1 The techniques in this and the next part made their first hesitant appearance in the
Brevis practica Tabulae generalis of 1304 (ALOG v, 314, 338 = Int. iii, 14, 38). Here and in
the Ars generalis ultima we have the first and only time they appear in their fully developed
form. For more information on their functioning, see Ca I, 445-9, and Artus, Ars Brevis,
pp. 296-302.
2 The compartment of B C implies those of B B, C C, and C B, and this for the two
different meanings of each letter. We therefore have 4 concepts, each of which can be
combined with 3 others, or 4 X 3 = 12. See Ca I, 445-6, for a tabulation of the results.

PART VI

599

nified by greatness is great; goodness is magnified by greatness;
therefore goodness is great, and so on for the others.3
After performing this evacuation, the intellect evacuates the
same compartment by means of 24 questions, since two questions
are implicit in each proposition. Thus one has:
goodness is great:
Whether goodness is great.
What is great goodness?
goodness is different:
Whether goodness is differ­
ent.
What is different goodness?
goodness is concordant:
Whether goodness is concor­
dant.
What is concordant good­
ness?
greatness is good:
Whether greatness is good.
What is good greatness?

greatness is different:
Whether greatness is differ­
ent.
What is different greatness?
greatness is concordant:
Whether greatness is concor­
dant.
What is concordant great­
ness?

difference is good:
Whether difference is good.
What is good difference?
difference is great:
Whether difference is great.
What is great difference?
difference is concordant:
Whether difference is concor­
dant.
What is concordant differ­
ence?
concordance is good:
Whether concordance is
good.
What is good concordance?
concordance is great:
Whether concordance is
great.
What is great concordance?
concordance is different:
Whether concordance is dif­
ferent.
What is different concord­
ance?

Once this evacuation of questions has been carried out, the in­
tellect then evacuates the compartment with the definitions of
goodness and greatness, and with the three species of difference
and concordance that appear in the Second Figure. Then it evac­
uates the compartment with the three species of Rule B and with
the four species of Rule C. Having carried out this evacuation,
3 This last sentence is missing in the Zetzner editions.

A£S BREVIS

600

the intellect solves the aforementioned questions in said evacua­
tion, by observing the conditions of the compartment, affirming,
or denying. And thus the intellect banishes doubts from the com­
partment, remaining in it calmly and positively. Moreover it now
knows itself to be completely general and artful, and clothed in
great knowledge.4
4 The Ars generalis ultima, whose text—with the exception of the larger table—has up
to this point been very similar to that of the Ars brevis, now continues with examples of
questions and answers from each of the thirty-six compartments of Figure 3.

»

PART VII, WHICH TREATS
OF THE MULTIPLICATION
OF THE FOURTH FIGURE'
The multiplication of the Fourth Figure consists of the follow­
ing, namely, that the first compartment B C D in the Fourth Figure
or in the Table means that B has one condition with C and another
with D; and C has one condition with B and another with D; and
D has one condition with B and another with C.2 And therefore
in this compartment there are six conditions with which the in­
tellect is conditioned and disposed to investigating, finding, ar­
guing, proving, and determining.3
After these six conditions, the intellect acquires another six, by
turning the smallest circle, putting its E where its D was, opposite
the C on the middle circle. And then, since the compartment has
been changed, so have its conditions. And thus the intellect now
has twelve4 conditions; and similarly for the other compartments,
by multiplying columns and turning them.
The conditions that the intellect multiplies in this way are dif­
ficult to enumerate. For from each compartment the intellect can
1 Cf. Part VI, n. 1.
2 This curious use of the word “condition” is defined in the Taula d’esta An (ORL xvn,
392) as being “the mixture of principles, with some being conditioned in others according
to their definitions and properties, like goodness which is conditioned to being great by
reason of greatness, and to being enduring by reason of eternity, and it is great and enduring
in accordance with its own condition, that is to say, that its greatness and duration be good;
and the same is true of‘condition’ with respect to the other principles.” Similar definition
in the Tree of Science, OE I, 579. See also Artus, Ars Brevis, p. 300.
3 In the Zetzner editions this paragraph is followed by a figure exhibiting the six con­
ditions:

9
in which one reads the relationships from left to right, with the figure right-side-up for 1,
2, and 4, and upside-down for 3, 5 and 6.
4 The Zetzner editions have 15, but since we are adding the 6 conditions of B C E to
the 6 of B C D, this is surely an error. The peculiar phrase at the end of the sentence would
seem simply to indicate a continuation of the process of rotating the wheels and deriving
the 6 conditions from each resultant compartment.

602

ARS BREVIS

evacuate 30 propositions and 90 questions, just as from the com­
partment B C of the Third Figure we derived 12 propositions and
24 questions.5 And as a result the intellect realizes it has become
completely general and artful, over and above another intellect
ignorant of this Art, who would reduce it to a multitude of in­
consistencies and impossibilities. The sophist will thus not be able
to stand up to such an intellect as that of the artist of this Art,
who uses primary and natural conditions, as opposed to the soph­
ist, who uses conditions that are secondary and unnatural, as is
explained in the Ars magna.6
5 Since each letter stands for 2 principles, in the compartment of B C D we therefore
have 6 principles, any one of which can form propositions with the remaining 5, giving
6 x 5 = 30. And since to each of these 30 propositions we can apply 3 questions, we have
30 x 3 = 90. This is merely a ternary version of the binary mechanism of Part vi.
6 The equivalent Part vh of the Ars generalis ultima, divided into five sections which
correspond only roughly to the five dispositions of the intellect given at the end of the first
paragraph, constitutes a small treatise on Lullian logic. After presenting (1) different ways
of multiplying the Fourth Figure (along with the Table), he goes on to (2) use the ternary
configurations to find the middle term between two concepts, leading him naturally into
the syllogistic, with which (3) he investigates (De modo probandi) the three types of dem­
onstration (see the Ars demonstrativa, Prologue, pars. 2-3); then he discusses (4) the fourteen
fallacies of the Logica nova, and ends with (5) a section on how the Art can be used to
acquire other sciences such as Theology, Philosophy, etc. Cf. Pla I, 447ff.

PART VIII, WHICH
TREATS OF THE MIX­
TURE OF PRINCIPLES
AND RULES'
In this part the intellect mixes one principle with another, ex­
amining each principle, with its definition, by means of the others,
and examining each principle by means of all the species of the
rules.1
2 By means of such an examination the intellect becomes
acquainted with each principle, and every time it mixes said prin­
ciple differently, it will find out something new about it. Who in
fact could enumerate all the means the intellect discovers for draw­
ing conclusions, with the intellect evacuating this mixture as it did
the compartment of B C discussed earlier?
This mixing is the center and foundation for the finding of all
sorts of propositions, questions, middle terms,3 conditions, so­
lutions, and even objections. But we will desist from giving ex­
amples of this to the discerning mind, for the sake of brevity, and
since this type of mixing is explained and exemplified in the Ars
magna.4
Furthermore, this mixture is subject and refuge for the artist of
this Art, so that he may find it in whatever he wants. For if he
needs to find out something that has to do with goodness, he has
only to examine said goodness by means of all the principles and
1 This mixing of principles and rules first appears in its fully developed form in the Liber
de praedicatione of 1304. In embryonic form, it first appears in the Investigatio mixtionum
generalium of 1294 (see Gaya, Correlativos, p. 93, for the work itself, and my “Notes,” Part
iv, for the date), and reappears in the Lectura super Artem inventivam et Tabulam generalem
(MOG N, 705 = Int. v, 347), Lectura compendiosa Tabulae generalis (MOG v, 344-5 = Int.
iv, 1-2), and Brevis practica Tabulae generalis (MOG v, 314, 337 = Int. iii, 14, 37).
2 The middle part of this sentence is missing in the printed sources.
3 In place of the media of all the other sources, the Zetzner editions have materiae,
“matters.”
4 And this at great length, in two sections. The first has eighteen chapters, each devoted
to one principle of the Art and its mixture with the other seventeen principles. The second
section similarly has eighteen chapters, each devoted to one principle of the Art, but here
each principle is mixed with all the species of the ten rules. In this second section of the
Ars generalis ultima, under Rule C (“What?”) each of these principles is defined again.

604

AKS BREVIS

rules, and from it he will find whatever he wants to understand.
And what we have said about goodness applies equally to the other
principles.
This mixture is conditioned and disposed according as one thing
is different from another. For if one examines divine goodness by
means of the principles and rules, this examination requires other
definitions and rules than does an examination of the goodness of
an angel; and the examination of the goodness of angel, another
than the goodness of man; and the goodness of man another than
the examination of the goodness of a lion, and so on.

PART IX, WHICH TREATS
OF THE NINE SUBJECTS
In

this Art we have put nine subjects,1 those indicated in the
Alphabet. They include everything that exists, for outside of them
there is nothing.
The first subject is God, denoted by the letter B.
The second subject is angel, denoted by the letter C.
The third subject is heaven, denoted by the letter D.
The fourth subject is man, denoted by the letter E.
The fifth subject is imagination, denoted by the letter F.
The sixth subject is the sensitive, denoted by the letter G.
The seventh subject is the vegetative, denoted by the letter H.
The eighth subject is the elementative, denoted by the letter I.
The ninth subject is instrumentality, denoted by the letter K.
Since in the Ars magna each subject is deduced by means of
principles and rules, we will therefore not investigate them here,
since we want to make this Art shorter than that one, and since
said deduction is implicit in this Art. For this reason we will desist
from presenting this matter to the discerning mind, which should
be content with the example given in the Third Figure, where we
apply all the principles to “goodness,” as well as all the rules of
this Art to “intellect.”
In dealing with these subjects, we must keep in mind four con­
ditions. By these the intellect will be conditioned to examine the
aforementioned subjects in a conditioned way, by means of the
principles and rules, according as each subject is conditioned by
its nature and essence. For divine goodness has one condition in
1 The idea of a scala naturae or a ladder of being is present in many works of Llull. It
provides the framework for Felix, the Tree of Science, and the Book of the Ascent and Descent
ofthe Intellect. During the ternary phase of the Art, it is discussed in the Ars inventiva veritatis
{MOG v, 47-61) under the heading of Transcendent Points. In the form of nine subjects,
it appears fleetingly in the Taula general {ORL xvi, 380, 505-14), Arbre de filosofia desiderat
{ORL xvii, 449), and the Ars compendiosa (ed. Ottaviano, pp. 155—61); but these subjects
are not incorporated into the structure and Alphabet of the Art until the Liber de praedicatione
{ROL hi, 144-53; cf. Soria’s comments on p. 95). This part of the Art constitutes, as
Carreras i Artau said (Ca I, 451), “a veritable treatise on ontology.” For the use of the
subjects here, see Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 303ff. In the Ars generalis ultima each is treated
much more extensively and systematically.

606

ARS BREVIS

God; angelical goodness another in an angel; and so on for the
rest. And the same is true for the rules.2
The first condition is as follows, namely, that each subject must
have a definition differentiating it from any other subject. And if
any inquiry is to be made into said subject, the answer must be
formulated in such a way, by affirming or denying, that the def­
initions of the principles accord with that of the subject; and the
same is true for the rules, without any injury being done to either
principles or rules.
The second condition is that in a judgment or in practice the
difference between subjects be preserved. Thus divine goodness
is different from the goodness of an angel by infinity and eternity,
since such goodness is the reason why God does infinite and eternal
good, whereas the goodness of an angel is finite and newly created.
The third condition is that the concordance between one subject
and another not be destroyed, as for instance, the concordance
existing between God and angel, for they are concordant in their
spirituality. And the same could be said of the other subjects.
The fourth condition is that, insofar as one subject is nobler and
loftier, one should assign it loftier and nobler principles and rules
than to another, as in the case of God, who is a loftier and nobler
subject than angel, and angel than man, and so on.

1. THE FIRST SUBJECT, WHICH IS GOD,
EXAMINED BY MEANS OF THE
PRINCIPLES
God can be examined by means of the principles and rules, for
God is good, great, etc. Many definitions can be given of Him,
if one wanted to do things extensively. But we will only give one:
God is that being who needs nothing outside Himself, because in
Him exist all perfections. With this definition, God is different
from any other being, for all other beings need something outside
themselves.
In God there is no contrariety or minority, for they are principles
having to do with privation and defect. Nevertheless, in God there
2 This last sentence is missing from the printed texts.

PART IX

607

is majority with respect to other beings; and there is equality, since
He has equal principles, such as goodness, greatness, etc., as well
as equal acts and relations.
In God there is difference of correlatives, without which said
correlatives could not exist at all; nor without them could God
exercise His infinite and eternal intrinsic action; moreover, without
them his dignities3 would be idle, which is completely impossible.
In God there is concordance, so that with it He may be infinitely
and eternally far from contrariety, and so that His correlatives may
accord infinitely and eternally in a single essence and nature. And
this is what can be said about His dignities.
In God there is no quantity, no time, nor any accident. The
reason is that His substance is separated from and stripped of all
accident, because it is infinite and eternal. And with God being
conditioned by the four above-mentioned conditions, the intellect
understands that it is conditioned to understand God and those
things which can be said about Him by means of the principles
and rules appropriate to God, and it also knows and understands
that if an angel has natural power in itself, and so on for the others,
so much more should God, since He is a higher subject, as is clear
through the relationship of lesser to greater.

2. THE SECOND SUBJECT WHICH IS
ANGEL4
Angel can be derived by means of principles and rules. Indeed,
it has natural goodness, greatness, duration, etc. And it is defined
thus: an angel is a spirit not joined to a body.
It has no natural contrariety, for it is incorruptible. In it there
is the matter of -able, that is to say, of bonifiable, magnifiable,
etc., as is indicated by the second species of D.5
In an angel there is majority, for it is more similar to God than
is man, since it contains higher principles and rules than man. As
a result, the intellect realizes that, if man cannot make use of his
3 Here referred to as rationed (Cat. rahons)-, cf. “Llull’s thought,” text at n. 28 above. See
Gaya, Correlativos, p. 164, for a commentary on this paragraph.
4 Cf. Felix, Bk. n and n. 1 there.
5 That is, Rule D. 2 of Part IV. From now on, single letters are to be taken as referring
to these Rules.

608

ARS BREVIS

senses without the corresponding organs, it does not follow from
this that an angel is similarly incapacitated, for an angel is of a
superior nature. As a result, the intellect realizes that angels can
talk to one another and act upon us without any organs, and they
can travel from one place to another without any means of lo­
comotion, and so on, as is clear to the intellect upon examining
the rules.
In an angel there is difference, for its intellect, will, and memory
are different from one another. There is equality of understanding,
loving, and remembering in an angel, by reason of the supreme
object, that is, God, who is equally intelligible, lovable, and mem­
orable. In an angel there is minority, since it has been created from
nothing.

3. THE THIRD SUBJECT, WHICH IS
HEAVEN6
Heaven has natural goodness, greatness, duration, etc., and
it is defined as follows: Heaven is the first mobile substance.
There is no contrariety in it, for it is not composed of contrary
principles. It has natural instinct and natural appetite, and therefore
movement, without which it could not possess a nature, instinct,
and appetite.
Nevertheless, it has a beginning, for it acts as an efficient cause
in things below it; moreover, this beginning is made up of its own
specific form and matter, so that it may act in accordance with its
species. Its movement constitutes its own end and resting place.
Heaven is in its place, like a body within its surface. Moreover,
it exists in time, for it was created. It is also in time in the way
that an efficient cause is related to its effect. And so on for its other
accidents, each in its own way.

4. THE FOURTH SUBJECT WHICH IS MAN7
Man

is composed of soul and body, and is therefore derivable

by means of the principles and rules in two ways, that is to say,
6 Llull usually discusses astronomy under this heading (cf. Yates, “Art,” p. 118), for
which subject see Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 83 below, and Felix, Bk. hi, with the
corresponding notes.
7 Bk. viii of Felix deals exclusively with man. See notes 1 and 9 there.

PART IX

609

in a spiritual and a corporeal way. And he is defined thus: man is
a manifying animal.8 All the principles and rules exist twice in
man, because of his double nature, that is, the spiritual and cor­
poreal parts of which he is composed. And thus he is more general
than any other created being, as a result of which one can say
without doubt that man constitutes the largest portion of the
world.

5. THE FIFTH SUBJECT, WHICH IS THE
IMAGINATIVE FACULTY9
There

are specific principles and rules in the imaginative faculty
for the purpose of imagining imaginable things, just as there are
in a lodestone for the purpose of attracting iron. And it is defined
thus: the imaginative is that power whose function it is to imagine.
And it is thus deduced by means of the principles and rules proper
to the imaginative faculty. The intellect has great knowledge of
it, as well as of those things that accord with it.
The imaginative faculty extracts species from the things sensed
with the individual senses; and this it does with its correlatives,
as indicated in the second species of Rule C. With goodness it
makes these species good, and with greatness it magnifies them,
as when it imagines a great mountain of gold. With minority it
lessens them, as when it imagines an indivisible point. The im­
aginative faculty has instinct, just as the lower animals have the
will to live, and a goat the instinct to avoid a wolf. The imaginative
faculty has an appetite to imagine the imaginable, so that, by im­
agining it, it may come to rest.
When the individual senses apprehend sensible things, as when
the eyes see something colored, they impede the imaginative fac8 Homo est animal (animal rationale in the Zetzner editions) homificans. See Part xi, ch. 2,
Question 3 for a defense of this definition.
9 In the Aristotelian philosophical vocabulary of the Middle Ages, imaginatio had nothing
to do with its modern connotations (as when we say that so-and-so has “imagination”),
but, closer to its etymology, referred to the faculty of perceiving images when the objects
of perception are no longer present to the senses. Note Llull’s definition in the Taula d’esta
Art (ORL xvii, 394): “The imaginative (faculty) is the power by which man imagines
imaginable things, like a person who, with his imagination, imagines figures that he has
seen, or lands where he has been, and so on.” Cf. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n. 56, as well
as here below, Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 31 and the note. For more information, see
C. Aos Braco, “La imaginacion en el sistema de Ramon Llull,” EL 23 (1979), 155-83.

610

ARS BREVIS

ulty, which then cannot carry out its act, since it cannot imagine
any imaginable thing outside itself until the eyes are closed, at
which point the imaginative faculty carries out its act, or can carry
it out.
The person seeing apprehends the colored object better by
seeing than by imagining, for something sensed is closer to the
particular sense. The imaginative faculty, however, apprehends
the imaginable object through the intermediary of sense. The im­
aginative faculty is thus not as general a power in sensed things
as is the sensitive faculty, as can be seen from the sense of touch,
with which a man holding a stone can, at one and the same time,
feel several different things, such as the weight, coldness, rough­
ness, and hardness of the stone; the imaginative faculty, however,
cannot do this, except successively. And the same is true of other
such things. And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough.

6. THE SIXTH SUBJECT, WHICH IS THE
SENSITIVE FACULTY
The principles and rules exist in the sensitive faculty in a specific
way, for it has one power through sight, another through hearing,
etc.; and this is especially so with the properties of instinct and
appetite. And it is defined thus: the sensitive is that power whose
function it is to sense. The sensitive faculty causes things to be
sensed with its specific principles and rules. It is general through
the common sense,10 particular through the individual senses.
Through the common sense it has common correlatives; through
the individual senses it has individual correlatives.11 The radical
life of the sensitive faculty comes from vegetable life, with which
it is connected, and in which it is planted, as is the vegetative in
the elementative. The sensitive faculty uses all the senses to sense
objects, as when it uses sight to sense something colored, and
hearing to sense a voice, using the affatus to give it a name. For
10 Not in our modern meaning; in the Middle Ages the “common sense” was, as the
OED says, “an ‘internal’ sense which was regarded as the common bond or centre of the
five senses, in which the various impressions received were reduced to the unity of a
common consciousness.”
11 These individual and common correlatives are set out in the chart le Myesier included
in the Electorium, fol. 96v (reproduced in Hillg, p. 425) and in the Breviculum, fol. 14v
(reproduced in Pring-Mill, “Trinitarian,” p. 253, and in his “Pontencias,” p. 111).

PART IX

611

without affatus the hearing cannot properly sense the voice, and
therefore the intellect knows that the affatus is a sense.12

7. THE SEVENTH SUBJECT, WHICH IS THE
VEGETATIVE13
In the vegetative there are specific principles and rules with
which plants act according to the species they belong to. For a
pepper, a rose, a lily, each acts according to its species. The prin­
ciples of the vegetative are denser than those of the sensitive, just
as the principles of the sensitive are denser than those of the im­
aginative. And it is defined thus: the vegetative is that power
whose function is to vegetate. Indeed it vegetates elemented things
just as the sensitive faculty senses either vegetated or elemented
things. The vegetative transforms the elementative into its own
species by way of generation; and from that it lives, grows, and
is nourished. And the vegetative dies through lack of the elemen­
tative, just as the light in a lamp dies out through lack of oil.

8. THE EIGHTH SUBJECT, WHICH IS THE
ELEMENTATIVE
In the elementative there are specific principles and rules, with
which it can have many species, such as gold, silver, and other
similar things. And it is defined thus: the elementative is that
power whose function it is to elementate. It has common correl­
atives, and what was said regarding the sensitive faculty can be
applied here to its individual components, that is to say, to fire,
12 This is a sixth sense Llull introduced in a treatise of the same name written in 1294.
In the Tree ofScience (OE I, 599) he defines it as “that sense by which the interior conception
is made manifest in speech, like a man who says and speaks what he thinks, or like a bird,
as for instance when a hen calls her chicks.” See J. Dagenais, “Speech as the sixth sense—
Ramon Llull’s affatus,” Estudis de Llengua, Literatura i Cultura Catalanes. Actes del Primer
Col-loqui d’Estudis Catalans a Nord-America. Urbana, 30 de mars-1 d’abril de 1978 (Montserrat,
1979), pp. 157-69, as well as Johnston, Semblance, pp. 64-7, 204-7.
13 I have followed Llull in using an adjective in -ive as a noun. The usage is justified
although rare in English (see OED, s.v. vegetative, B) as referring to the vegetative faculty
or power. I have kept to this usage in the following two chapters, but not in the previous
two, where it seemed more natural to speak of the imaginative and sensitive faculties. For
information on the “vegetative” see Felix, Bk. vm, ch. 44, and principally nn. 9 and 20,
as well as ch. 49.

612

ARS BREVIS

air, water, and earth, which have their own correlatives,14 without
which these elements could not exist, just as the correlatives could
not exist without elements, which constitute the ultimate foun­
dation of said elementative.
And through these correlatives, the elementative has points,
lines and figures, length, width, depth and volume, qualities and
complexions, hardness, roughness, lightness, and heaviness, etc.
And as a result the intellect understands that the elements are ac­
tually present in elemented things, although in a loose way; for
otherwise elemented things would not have anything out of which
they would be made, nor would they be of the genus of substance,
nor would they have form, matter, motion, instinct, length,
width, volume or appetite, which is completely impossible and
absurd to maintain.

9. THE NINTH SUBJECT, WHICH IS THE
INSTRUMENTATIVE15
This

subject deals with instrumentality, and it can be considered
in two ways, that is, naturally, like the eyes, which are the in­
strument for seeing, and morally, like justice, which is the in­
strument forjudging, and a hammer for making things.
One can acquire knowledge of a natural instrument by using
the principles and rules of the Art to deduce it in a specific way;
similarly one can use the same principles and rules to deduce a
moral instrument in its own specific way.
Natural and moral instruments differ from one another. We
will, however, spare the discerning reader such a deduction or
investigation; and if the mind of the artist feels the need for such
an investigation, he should turn to the Ars magna, in which we
discuss moral questions at length. But since we mentioned moral
concepts in the Alphabet, we therefore want to define our moral
instruments, so that, by means of the definitions, along with the
principles and rules, the artist can gain knowledge of morality.
14 For charts of these correlatives (along with those of the senses), see the references in
n. 11 above.
15 Or “artifice” as he refers to it in some works, such as the Liber de praedicatione, ROL
hi, 153.

PART IX

613

1. The instrumentative is the power with which a moral person
acts morally.
2. Justice is the disposition16 with which ajust person acts justly.
3. Prudence is the disposition with which the prudent person
operates prudently.
4. Fortitude is the disposition with which the strong in heart
act with virility.
5. Temperance is the disposition that the temperate person uses
in acting temperately.
6. Faith is the disposition with which a person believes to be
true something he neither senses nor understands.
7. Hope is the disposition with which someone hopes for God’s
forgiveness and for glory, and places his trust in his good and
powerful friend.
8. Charity is the virtue with which a person makes his private
wealth available to others.
9. Patience is the disposition with which the patient person van­
quishes and is not vanquished.
10. Pity is the disposition with which the kind person suffers
for the suffering of his fellow man.17
11. Avarice is the disposition with which the rich man is poor
and beggarly.
12. Gluttony is the disposition with which the glutton later finds
himself imprisoned in sickness and poverty.
13. Lust is the disposition with which a man uses his powers
wrongly and counter to the order of matrimony.
14. Pride is the disposition with which the proud man tries to
make himself superior to other men, and it is contrary to humility.
15. Accidie is the disposition with which the accidious person
grieves over another’s good fortune and is joyful over his ills.
16. Envy is the disposition with which the envious person un­
justly desires another’s possessions.
16 Habitus in the original, for which see Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n. 157, as well as here
below, Part x, “Hundred Forms,” no. 21. For the virtues and vices which follow, and
which of course made up Figure V of the Ars demonstrativa, see the various references among
Gentile, Bk. I, nn. 19-35, as well as among Felix, Bk. vm, chs. 63-75.
17 These last two virtues are new, with respect to the lists in the Gentile and the Ars
demonstrativa, having been added, like the last two vices, so as to be able to accommodate
them to the nine-letter alphabet.

614

ARS BREVIS

17. Ire is the disposition with which the irate person shackles
his thinking and his freedom.
18. Falsehood is the disposition with which the liar talks or gives
testimony contrary to the truth of a thing.
19. Inconstancy is the disposition with which a fickle person is
changeable in many ways.18

So much for the nine subjects, about which the artist can gain
knowledge by examining them in the light of the principles and
rules of this Art.19
18 Cf. n. 17 above.
19 Which is preciesely what is done in the corresponding section of the Ars generalis ultima.

PART X, WHICH TREATS
OF APPLICATION
Application is divided into three parts. The first is when the
implicit is applied to the explicit. The second is when the abstract
is applied to the concrete. The third is when a question is applied
to places in the Art. Let us first of all discuss the first part.
1. If the terms of the question are implicit, they should be applied
to the explicit1 terms of the Art, as when one asks whether God
exists or whether angels exist. And the same is true for others
applied to goodness, greatness, etc., such as: Whether it is a great,
good, etc. thing that God exists and that angels exist.
2. The second part is as follows: if the terms of the question are
abstract, they should be applied to concrete terms, such as good­
ness to good, greatness to great, color to colored, and so on. And
in this way one should see how an abstract and a concrete term
are related to one another, as one examines them by means of the
principles and rules.
3. The third part deals with application to specific places, and
it is divided into thirteen parts,2 as follows: (1) First Figure, (2)
Second Figure, (3) Third Figure, (4) Fourth Figure, (5) Definitions,
(6) Rules, (7) Table, (8) Evacuation of the Third Figure, (9) Mul­
tiplication of the Fourth Figure, (10) Mixture of Principles and
Rules, (11) The Nine Subjects, (12) The Hundred Forms, (13)
Questions
The subject matter of the questions must be applied to these
parts according as it is suitable to them. For if the subject matter
of a question is relevant to the First Figure, then it must be applied
to that figure, and the solution drawn from the text of that figure,
by affirming or denying in such a way that the text is not violated.
And what we have said about the first figure can be said about
the others, each in its own way. Since we want to be brief, this
1 Thus in the printed sources and some mss; three other mss have “explained”; the rest
of the mss have “applied,” which seems hard to justify in the context. For the concepts of
“implicit” and “explicit” see Johnston, Semblance, pp. 139-40.
2 After “specific places” the correcting hand in the Milan Catalan ms adds a helpful “of
this Art.” These thirteen parts, plus the previous two paragraphs, constitute the fifteen
parts into which the corresponding section of the Ars generalis ultima is divided.

616

ARS BREVIS

should be enough concerning application; if, however, the reader
would like to know more about applying terms, he should turn
to the Ars magna, where we discuss the matter at length.

12. THE HUNDRED FORMS3
In this part the reader will find a hundred forms with their
definitions, so that a given subject can be made to reach the in­
tellect. For by means of the definitions of the forms, the intellect
will be conditioned to examining them by the principles and rules.4
And through such an examination the intellect acquires knowledge
of the forms discussed in the questions. Here now are the hundred
forms with their definitions:
1. Entity is the cause by reason of which one thing causes an­
other thing.5
2. Essence is the form abstracted from and sustained in being.6
3. Unity is the form whose function is to unite.
4. Plurality is the form that is an aggregate of many things
differing in number.7
3 The Hundred Forms make their first appearance in the Tree ofScience, and, in somewhat
different form, in nos. 101-200 of the Proverbs of Ramon of the same year. They reappear
in the Logica nova (1303), Introductorium magnae Artis generalis (1306), Ars generalis ultima
(1305-8), here (1308), and finally in the Ars consilii (1315). Cf. Pla I, 413-21. Note that all
these lists are different, except for those here and in the Ars generalis ultima, which are
identical.
4 The corresponding definitions in the Ars generalis ultima usually point out which prin­
ciples or rules are to be used for investigating each “form.” So, in effect, the Hundred
Forms constitute a method for integrating a series of special topics into the Art and of
making them available to the “Artist” as ancillary tools.
5 In the corresponding “form” of the Ars generalis ultima, Llull illustrates his point: “as
goodness is the reason why some good does good,” and “as greatness is the reason why
goodness is great.”
6 In the Taula d’esta Art {ORL xvn, 393), Llull relates “essence” {essentia) and “being”
{esse) in slightly different terms: “essence is that by which being exists, just as humanity
is the essence by which man exists.” That this definition ties them in with the previous
pair is confirmed on the same pages of the Taula d'esta Art where Llull says that “entity
{entitas) is the essence of a thing {ens), which constitutes its act,” to which he adds, in the
corresponding “form” of the Ars generalis ultima, “Since entity and essence are convertible,
therefore so are being and thing. And what we said [above) about entity and thing, we
can say [here] about essence and and being,” after which he goes on to say that essence is
the (superior) abstract, and being its (inferior) concrete. Cf. Logica nova (Palma, 1744), p.
69; Pla I, 140, 142; the same author’s remarks in EL 2 (1958), 32; and W. W. Artus, “Esse
and the Author of the Liber contemplationis in Deum,” EL 21 (1977), 145-71, and especially
p. 155 for the four terms discussed here.
7 For “unity” and “plurality” see also Gentile, Bk, I, n. 36. Many of these Hundred
Forms can be grouped in pairs or triplets. Llull is more explicit about this in the Tree of
Science, where they are presented individually the first time around (OE I, 570-90) and in
groups the second time (OE I, 600-8).

PART X

617

5. Nature is the form whose function is to naturize.8
6. Genus is something widely applicable and very indefinite,
which is predicated of many things differing in species.9
7. Species is something that is predicated of many things dif­
fering in number.10
8. Individuality is the term farther from genus than any other
thing.11
9. Property is the form with which the agent acts specifically.12
10. Simplicity is the form that is farther from composition than
any other thing.
11. Composition is the form that is an aggregate of many es­
sences.
12. Form is the essence with which the agent acts in matter.
13. Matter is simply passive essence.13
14. Substance is a thing existing by itself.14
15. Accident is a form not existing by itself, nor one related
principally to its own end.
16. Quantity is the form by reason of which a subject is quan­
titative and with which it acts quantitatively.15
8 For “nature” see Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n. 146. In OED, “naturize” (naturare) is
defined as “to invest with a specific nature.”
9 This, along with nos. 7, 9, and 15, represent four of the five predicables (the medieval
descendants of the Aristotelian topics), or universals as Llull frequently calls them. The
missing one, “difference,” is not treated here since it has already appeared as a component
of Figure T. The definition of “genus” in the Logica nova (Palma, 1744), p. 19, is identical
with that here, but adds, “just as animal [is predicated] of man, lion, eel, etc.”
10 The Logica nova (Palma, 1744), p. 22, adds, “like Socrates, Plato, etc., which are
contained in the human species, and like this lion and that lion, which are in the leonine
species.”
11 In the Introductorium magnae Artis generalis, Hundred Forms, no. 19, Llull adds, “like
Peter, [which is predicated] of him alone.” For the notion of individuitas, which could also
be translated as “indivisibility,” see B. S. Jorgensen, “Individuation und Individuationsprinzip im Schriftum Raymund Lulls,” EL 21 (1977), 5-34, and especially p. 18 for a
commentary on this passage. Note that some of the printed sources of the Ars brevis have
“thing” instead of “term” here.
12 “. . .just as pepper has the property of heating, rhubarb of attracting choler, a magnet
of attracting iron, and a lion of begetting a lion,” Tree of Science, OE I, 578.
13 For “form” and “matter,” see Gentile, Bk. I, n. 36.
14 We now begin with the Aristotelian categories or predicaments. For their division
into substance and accident, which latter is in turn divided into the remaining nine categories
(nos. 16-24 below), see Ars demonstrativa, Dist. I, n. 19. For “substance,” see the extended
discussion in the Logica nova (Palma, 1744), pp. 36-40, as well as the following pages there
for the remaining categories.
15 . . . est quantum . . . agit quantum, where quantum means literally “how much.” For
“quantity” see Part iv, Rule F above, as well as Gentile, Bk. I, n. 4.

618

ARS BREVIS

17. Quality is that by reason of which principles are of the sort
they are.
18. Relation is a form existing with respect to many different
things, without which it cannot exist.
19. Action is a form inherent in whatever is passive.
20. Passion is the thing underlying and inherent in action.16
21. Habit is the form with which a subject is clothed.17
22. Position is the disposition of parts, properly and duly ar­
ranged in a subject.18
23. Time is the entity within which created beings are begun
and renewed. Or: Time is that thing made up of many nows with
reference to before and after.
24. Place is the accident by which things are located. Or: Place
is the surface immediately surrounding and containing the inner
parts of a body.
25. Motion is the instrument with which the mover moves the
thing moved. Or: Motion is that which knows the nature of be­
ginning, middle, and end.
26. Immobility is that thing having no inclination to move.
27. Instinct is the figure and likeness of the intellect.
28. Appetite is the figure and likeness of the will.19
29. Attraction is the form with which the thing attracting at­
tracts the thing attracted. Or: Attraction is a form having the in­
stinct and appetite to attract something to a subject.
30. Reception is the form with which the thing receiving re­
ceives the thing received. Or: Reception is a form having the in­
stinct and appetite to receive something in a subject.
31. Fantasy is a likeness extracted from things by means of the
imagination.20
32. Fullness is the form far from emptiness.
16 The printed editions have, “Passion is the thing [underlying action, and] sustaining
it,” with the Zetzner editions omitting the words in brackets. For “passion” see Gentile,
Bk. hi, n. 53.
17 Cf. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n. 157, for habitus.
18 Besides “position,” situs can also be translated as “situation” or “posture.”
19 For “instinct” and “appetite,” and their relation to “intellect” and “will,” see Gentile,
Bk. H, n. 10. The second definitions added to both nos. 27 and 28 in the printed sources
are doubtless later additions, since they appear in none of the medieval mss.
20 Phantasia was the Greek word whose usual scholastic translation was precisely the
word imaginatio, also used here, for which latter see Part ix, n. 9 above.

PART X

619

33. Diffusion is the form with which the thing diffusing diffuses
what is diffusible.
34. Digestion is the form by means of which the thing digesting
digests what is digestible.21 22
35. Expulsion is the form with which nature expels those things
which are not suitable to a subject.
36. Signification is the revelation of hidden things indicated by
a sign.
37. Beauty is a lovely form received by the sense of sight or of
hearing, or by the imagination, thought, or sense of pleasure.
38. Newness is the form by reason of which a subject is clothed
with new characteristics.
39. Idea, in God, is God; in creation, however, it is creature.23
40. Metaphysics is the form with which the human intellect
strips substance of its accidents.24
41. Potential being is a form existing in a subject without mo­
tion, quantity, quality, and so on.25
42. Punctuality is the essence of the natural point, which is the
smallest part of a body.26
43. A line is a length made up of many connected points and
whose extremities consist of two points.
44. A triangle is a figure with three acute angles enclosed within
three straight lines.
45. A square is a figure with four right angles.
46. A circle is a figure enclosed by a circular line.
47. A body is a substance consisting of points, lines, and angles.
21 Cf. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n. 162.
22 Cf. Gentile, Bk. in, n. 37.
23 The Ars generalis ultima ties this concept in with the previous one: “Idea in eternity is
God; in newness [thus, instead of ‘creation’, in many of the printed sources of the Ars brevis
as well] it is creature, just as the shape of a box in a carpenter’s thoughts can be old, but
when it is brought from potentiality to act, then it is new.” Cf. Form 57 below. Ca I, 482,
comments on the clearly Platonic ancestry of this statement; see also Colomer, Edad Media,
p. 57.
24 Many of the sources have “mathematics” instead of (and even sometimes alongside)
“metaphysics,” but from the definition here, and from the contrasting definitions of the
two terms in the Introductorium magnae Artisgeneralis (Lyon, 1635), p. 15, Hull must surely
have meant “metaphysics” here.
25 In the Ars generalis ultima Llull adds, “like the seed, in which the tree exists potentially. ”
26 “Punctuality” in the literal senses, from punctum, “point.” In the Ars generalis ultima
Llull adds that it is indivisible and cannot be grasped by the senses or by the imagination.
For Llull’s use of this word in the setting of his time, see J. Gaya, “La Concepcion luliana
de ‘punctum’ en su contexto medieval,” EL 19 (1975), 41-51.

620

ARS BREVIS

48. A figure is an accident made up of position and habit.27
49. The general directions are six, with the body at the center
of diametrical lines.28
50. Monstrosity is the deviation of natural motion.
51. Derivation is the material foundation by which the particular
descends from the universal.29
52. Shade is the state of privation of light.
53. A mirror is a transparent body arranged so as to receive all
the figures presented to it.3"
54. Color is a condition contained within a figure.31
55. Proportion is the form whose function is to proportion.
56. Disposition is the form whose function is to dispose.
57. Creation, in eternity, is idea; in time, however, it is creature.
58. Predestination, in God’s wisdom, is idea; in creation, how­
ever, it is creature.32
59. Mercy, in eternity, is idea; in something predestined, how­
ever, it is creature.
60. Necessity is the form that cannot be otherwise; but the ne­
cessitated subject is the thing containing it.
61. Fortune is accident inherent in a subject; but the fortunate
person is one disposed toward it.33
62. Order is the form whose function is to order; he who is
ordered, on the other hand, is his own subject.
63. Counsel refers to a proposition open to doubt, and the per­
son counseled is where it comes to rest.
27 Constitutum ex situ et habitu; cf. Forms 21-2 for the last two terms. To this definition
of “figure,” the Ars generalis ultima adds, “With color a figure is a visual object, and with
lines and angles, and without color, it is a tactile object; with all of these things it is an
object of the imagination, which shows us that the imagination is a power superior to
sense, and more general than sight.”
28 For these pre-Cartesian coordinates, see Gentile, Bk. n, n. 6.
29 The printed sources have “general” for “material.” The Ars generalis ultima adds, “like
a stream from a spring, a line from points, a triangle from lines, a child from parents . . . ,
a conclusion from its premises, a consequence from an antecedent, and knowledge from
things [scientia a rebus] by means of the mind.”
30 In the Ars generalis ultima Llull says that the transparency of a mirror differs from that
of a pane of glass without lead, in that the latter is transparent on both sides, and he then
goes on to explain the reflecting action of the lead.
31 In the Introductorium magnae Artis generalis, Hundred Forms, no. 62, Llull adds that
“there are four general colors, to wit, lightness [luciditas], transparency, whiteness, black­
ness.”
32 Cf. n. 23 above.
33 Cf. Gentile, Bk. I, n. 40.

PART X

621

64. Grace is a primary form, placed in the person receiving it
without any merit on his part.
65. Perfection is the form whose function it is to perfect in a
perfect subject.
66. Explanation is the form in which the intellect finds rest after
making distinctions; the person enlightened is its subject, in whom
the clarification is a condition.34
67. Transubstantiation is the act of nature in what is transub­
stantiated, which is stripped of its old form and clothed in a new
one.
68. Alteration is the form born in the thing altered.
69. Infinity is that form having infinite activity and removed
from anything finite.
70. Deception is the positive state of the deceiver, and it is the
privative state of the person deceived.
71. Honor is an active state in the person honoring, but passive
in the person being honored.
72. Capacity is the form with which something is capable of
containing and receiving as much as is allotted to it.35
73. Existence is the form with which the thing existing is what
it is. Agency is the form moving the thing existing to its terminal
point.36
74. Comprehension is the semblance of the infinite, apprehen­
sion, of the finite.37
75. Discovery is the form with which the intellect discovers the
thing discovered.38
34 “Clarification” is declaratio, and “the person enlightened” is declaratus in the original.
35 Llull uses this word both in its physical sense (see the Liber degeometria nova, ed. Millas,
p. 94) and in the metaphorical sense. The latter is illustrated by the definition in the Logica
nova (Palma, 1744), p. 73, which ties this concept with the next one defined: “Capacity is
the habit with which possibility is clothed so that the doer and the doable [agens et agibile]
have the proper proportion and disposition in relation to one another.”
36 Or as defined in the Introductorium magnae Artis generalis, Hundred Forms, no. 51:
“Existence is the essence of the thing [enfis] which exists; agency is the being of the thing
doing jest esse agendi], but doing [agere] is the act of existence, like heat heating or good
doing good.” For “existence,” see also W. W. Artus, (n. 6 above), pp. 156-7.
37 In scholastic terminology, “apprehension” was contrasted to the action of grasping
something in its totality, which was “comprehension”; i.e., we can apprehend, not com­
prehend, God. See Blaise, Lexicon, s.v. apprehensio.
38 For a discussion of the concept of inventio (Cat. atrobament), see Ars demonstration, Dist.
in, Mode 6 and the note there.

622

ARS BREVIS

76. Semblance is the form with which the thing assimilating
assimilates to itself the thing similar to it.39
77. The antecedent is the form giving rise to the consequent;
the consequent is the form in which the antecedent comes to rest.
78. Power is the form with which the intellect apprehends the
object. Object is the subject in which the intellect comes to rest.
Act is the connection between power and object.40
79. Generation, in creatures, is the form with which the agent
brings about new forms. Corruption is the form with which the
thing corrupting undoes old forms. Privation, moreover, exists
between them, in the middle.41
80. Theology is the science that speaks of God.
81. Philosophy is the subject by means of which the intellect
concentrates on all the sciences.42
82. Geometry is an art devised for the measuring of lines, angles,
and figures.43
83. Astronomy is the art by which the astronomer knows the
influences and movements that the heavens effectively exercise
over inferior things.44
39 See Felix, Bk. vin, ch. 85 and the note there for this concept so important to Llull.
Johnston, Semblance, p. 46, quotes the corresponding definition from the Arsgeneralis ultima,
as well as that from the Tree of Science, OE I, 581.
411 This important trio, which we met fleetingly in the Ars demonstrativa (Dist. iv, n. 30),
began its career as a fundamental paradigm for the correlatives in the Tree of Science of
1295-6 (OE I, 576-7 and 602; cf. Gaya, Correlatives, p. 109) and even more definitively
in the Liber de potentia, objecto et actu of the same year of 1296 (cf. Gaya, Correlativos, pp.
121-4).
41 For the Aristotelian “generation and corruption,” see: Gentile, Bk. I, n. 36; Felix, Bk.
iv, ch. 20; and the Principles of Medicine, Dist. vi. Once again, it was in the Tree of Science
(OE I, 601) that Llull turned this pair into a triplet by adding “privation,” for which see
Gentile, Bk. I, n. 9.
42 Forms 80-1 along with 91-2 formed the “four sciences” as Llull called them (see the
following note for references), and on which earlier he had written the Quattuor Libri
Principiorum (nos. II. A. 6-9 in the Catalogue of Works at the end of Vol. n here). In this
definition, the Zetzner editions have “science” instead of this “subject.” The corresponding
definition of the Ars generalis ultima is quoted and commented in Johnston, Semblance, pp.
88-9.
43 Forms 82-8 constituted the seven liberal arts, which, along with the four sciences of
the previous note, Llull discusses in the following: Doctrina pueril, chs. 73-8; Tree ofScience,
OE I, 630—3, 935—8; Brevis practica Tabulae generalis, MOG v, 319—35 = Int. iii, 19-35;
and the Introductorium magnae Artis generalis, “Hundred Forms,” nos. 84, 87-96, 98, as well
as the last chapter of the work. For Llull on the seven liberal arts, see also Colomer, Edad
Media, pp. 44-55. The corresponding form of the Ars generalis ultima constitutes a mini­
treatise on geometry. Llull also wrote two works on this subject: the Liber de geometria nova
and the De quadratura et triangulatura circuli.
44 Some mss have “astrology” for “astronomy.” In the printed texts of the Ars generalis

PART X

623

84. Arithmetic is the art devised for the counting of many
units.45
85. Music is the art devised to arrange many voices so they may
be concordant in a single song.46
86. Rhetoric is the art with which the rhetorician adorns and
colors his words.47
87. Logic is the art with which the logician finds the natural
connection between subject and predicate.48
88. Grammar is the art of finding the correct way of speaking
and writing.49
89. Morality is the disposition toward doing good or evil.
ultima, this sentence begins, “Astronomy is the art with which astrologers . . .’’It would
be quite wrong to impose our modern separation of astrology and astronomy, as between
superstition and science, on the Middle Ages, and even, for that matter, on the Renaissance.
Most of the great minds, from Aquinas and Roger Bacon to Tycho Brahe and Kepler
accepted the astrological world view inherited from classical times. On this subject Llull
wrote a Tractatus novus de astronomia. For a discussion of his astronomical ideas, see M.
Pereira, “Sulle opere scientifiche di Raimondo Lullo. I—La nuova astronomia,” Physis 15
(1973), 40ff., and the same author’s “Ricerche intorno al Tractatus novus de astronomia di
Raimondo Lullo,” Medioevo 2 (1976), 169-226, as well as the other references in Part ix,
n. 6 above.
45 The distinction between arithmetic as dealing with discrete numbers and geometry
with the continuum was standard in the Middle Ages, and dated from the Greeks, who
never quite recovered from the Pythagorean discovery that a real number such as V2 could
be represented on a line (as the hypotenuse of a right triangle with unit legs) but could not
be represented by a fraction (i.e., by a rational number).
46 Possibly the only common medieval subject on which Llull wrote almost nothing was
music; for the few passages where he does discuss it, see Caimari’s note in the ENC edition
of Blaquerna, Vol. iv, 16-17.
47 In addition to the works mentioned in n. 43 above, Llull discusses rhetoric in the Book
of Contemplation, ch. 359, as well the Rhetorica nova of 1301. The latter work, previously
analyzed by J. Rubio Balaguer in EL 3 (1959), 5-20, 263-74, and 5 (1961), 140, has now
been edited and commented on at length in Johnston, Semblance.
48 In the Ars generalis ultima Llull refers the reader back to his discussion of the middle
term (cf. Part n, n. 3, and Part vn, n. 6 above) and to the five predicables (see n. 9 above)
and the ten predicaments (see n. 14). He then compares logic to the Art, saying that the
former deals with second intentions, the latter with first; the former is unstable and weak
(instabilis scientia sive labilis) while the latter is enduring and firm (permanens et illabilis)', the
logician arrives at a conclusion by using two premisses, the artist by mixing principles and
rules. He ends by saying how much easier is the latter; in fact, “the artist can learn more
about this Art in one month than the logician about logic in a whole year.” After the early
versions of al-Ghazzali’s logic (see p. 20 above), Llull wrote in 1303 the Logica nova and
the De modo applicandi novam logicam ad scientiam juris et medicinam. With the post-Art phase
that begins in 1308 right after the writing of the Ars brevis, Llull’s preoccupation with logic
becomes much more intense (works such as Liber de fallaciis novis, De conversione syllogismi
opinativi in demonstrativum, etc.). For a discussion of Llull’s logic, see Johnston, Semblance,
pp. 208-33.
9 The corresponding section of the Ars generalis ultima ties in the different “modes” of
grammar (the parts of speech, cases, conjugation, declension, gender, etc.) with the different
parts of the Art. Cf. Pla I, 385-8 and Johnston, Semblance, pp. 174-5.

624

ARS BREVIS

90. Politics is the art with which townspeople work for the
public good of the city.50
91. Law is the well-ordered act of a man possessing justice.51
92. Medicine is the method with which the doctor looks after
the health of the patient.52
93. Government is the form with which a prince governs his
people.53
94. Chivalry is the disposition with which the knight helps the
prince maintain justice.54
95. Commerce is the disposition with which the merchant buys
and sells.55
96. Navigation is the art by which sailors know how to navigate
in the sea.56
97. Conscience is the form with which the intellect afflicts the
soul for the wrongs it has committed?7
98. Preaching is the form with which the preacher instructs
people so they will have good conduct and avoid bad con­
duct.58
50 Note the urban setting of this definition, as opposed to the feudal one of “government”
in Form 93 below.
51 On the subject of law, Llull wrote the Principles of Law and the Ars juris during the
quaternary phase of his production, the De modo applicandi (see n. 48 above) and the Ars
juris naturalis (1304) during the ternary phase, and the Ars brevis juris civilis (1308) when
that phase was ending and the last one beginning. For more references, see Ars demonstrativa,
Dist. iv, n. 166.
52 For Llull’s writings on this subject, see the introduction to the Principles of Medicine
below.
53 See Felix, Bk. vni, ch. Ill for a discussion of this topic.
54 Llull often includes chivalry, along with the next two concepts, among the “mechanical
arts,” for which see Felix, Bk. vin, n. 252. In addition to the references there, he also
discusses chivalry and commerce in the Proverbs of Ramon, chs. 275 and 280, as well as the
Lectura super Artem inventivam et Tabulam generalem, MOG v, 709, 711 = Int. v, 351, 353,
and to the former topic he devoted the Book of the Order of Chivalry. For a more critical
view of knighthood, see the Book of Contemplation, ch. 112 (cf. Hillgarth, Kingdoms I, 60),
and the Tree of Science, OE I, 903, (also p. 630).
55 The Ars generalis ultima adds, “in order to increase his wealth.” See the previous note
for references.
56 The equivalent section of the Ars generalis ultima constitutes a minitreatise on navi­
gation, complete with a diagram (more elaborate in the Palma, 1645, edition; simplified
in the Zetzner editions) and hypothetical problems with their solutions. See J. Sureda
Blanes, Ramon Llull i I’origen de la cartografa mallorquina (Barcelona, 1969), pp. 32ff., for a
good discussion of Llull’s nautical knowledge in its medieval setting.
57 Cf. Felix, Bk. vra, ch. 102.
58 Cf. Ars demonstrativa, Dist. hi, Mode 8.

PART X

625

99. Prayer is the form with which the person praying speaks to
God in a holy way.59
100. Memory is that thing with which things can be recalled.60
59 Cf. Felix, Bk. vin, ch. 105.
611 The peculiar repetition of “thing” (e«s) is in the original. In the Ars generalis ultima
memory is derived by means of the principles and rules, constituting another (five page)
minitreatise, a treatment similar to that in the Tree of Science, OE I, 617-19, and in the
Arbre de filosofia desiderat, ORL xvn, 449-54 (cf. the definition on p. 413). He also wrote
a Liber de memoria in 1304, the Liber ad memoriam confirmandum in 1308 and the brief Liber
de memoria Dei in 1314. Cf. F. A. Yates, The Art of Memory (London, 1966), ch. 8, and
Rossi, “The Legacy,” pp. 197ff.

PART XI, WHICH TREATS
OF QUESTIONS
This part is divided into twelve parts or headings, arranged and
distributed according to the varying subject matter of the ques­
tions. For the solution to one question is indicated in one part or
under one heading, and the solution to another under another.
Because of this we will apply the questions in different ways to
the aforesaid parts.
And this we will do in two ways, that is to say, we will solve
some of the questions we propose and others not. These last we
leave for the discerning artist, so that he may extract their solutions
from those parts or headings to which we refer said questions, in
which parts, or under which headings, he will find the solutions
indicated.
For the sake of brevity we will here pose and solve few ques­
tions, for this Art is an extract from the Ars magna, treating it
more briefly so that the intellect may grasp many things in few
words. In this way the intellect is made more universal and, by
means of the solutions to the questions posed and given here, is
enabled to solve other questions, each in its own way.
The headings or parts to which we refer the questions are, as
we said above, twelve.1 They are, respectively: (1) the First Figure,
(2) the Second Figure, (3) the Third Figure, (4) the Fourth Figure,
(5) the Definitions, (6) the Rules, (7) the Table, (8) the Evacuation
of the Third Figure, (9) the Multiplication of the Fourth Figure,
(10) the Mixture of Principles and Rules, (11) the Nine Subjects,
(12) the Hundred Forms.
And first we will discuss the first part or heading.

1. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE FIRST
FIGURE
1. Question: Whether there exists any being in which subject and
predicate are converted into an identity of essence, nature, and
1 Cf. Part x, par. 3 above. The corresponding part of the Ars generalis ultima only gives
six, omitting the first six in the following list and starting directly with the Table. This
seems to be the only place where the Ars brevis is in fact more complete.

PART XI

627

number throughout the entire First Figure. The answer is yes, for
otherwise the conversion of subject and predicate, as well as their
equality, would be destroyed absolutely, and eternity would be
superior through infinity of duration, while its goodness, great­
ness, power would be inferior through finiteness, which is im­
possible.
2. Question: What is that being in whom subject and predicate
convert? To which one must answer: God is that being, for such
a conversion cannot exist except in an infinite and eternal subject.2
3. Question: Whether divine goodness has in itself as great bon­
ification as the divine intellect has intellection.
4. Question: Why is the agency God has in Himself as great as
His existence?
5. Question: From what does God derive power equal to His
being?3
6. Question: Why do man and animal not convert? To which
one must reply: Because conversion cannot be carried out between
greater and lesser, but only between equal things.
7. Question: Whether an angel’s power, intellect, and will con­
vert. To which one must reply: No, or otherwise it could have
an act as infinite and eternal as God’s.

2. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
SECOND FIGURE
Questions relating to the Second Figure can be formulated in
three ways, like a man and a lion, who through difference differ
in species, through concordance accord in genus, and through
contrariety are contrary to each other, that is, through what is
corruptible and incorruptible. And so on for the other questions,
each in its own way.
1. Question: Whether difference is more general than concord­
ance and contrariety. To which one must answer that it is, since
whenever there is concordance and contrariety, there is difference;
but the converse is not true in all things. For in many things one
2 For the convertibility of the dignities as a definition of God, see Colomer, Edad Media,
p. 88.
3 The answer in the Ars generalis ultima, Part ix, sect. 1, cap. 6, art. 2, is “from Himself
in Himself.”

628

ARS BREVIS

can find difference and concordance, without their naturally contraining any contariety, as with spiritual things.
2. Question: Which is the greater principle, concordance or con­
trariety? The answer is concordance, for from concordance pos­
itive principles are derived, whereas those that derive from con­
trariety are privative.
3. Question: Whether a definition such as, Man is a manifying
animal, or, Man is that being whose function is to manify, is more
ostensive than the following one: Man is a rational, mortal animal.
And one must reply that it is. The reason for this is that manification is something only proper to man, whereas rationality and
mortality are proper to many things.4
By means of the triangle of beginning, middle, and end one can
formulate questions in three ways. The first is when one asks:
4. Why is there one first cause and not several? To which one
must reply: For the reason that there must exist one end which is
infinite.
The second way is when one asks:
5. Whether the middle existing between subject and predicate
is of a continuous or discrete quantity. And one must reply that
it is of a continuous quantity with respect to the middle between
extremes, while it is discrete with respect to the middle of con­
junction and that of measurement.
The third way is when one asks:
6. What is the final end in a subject? And one must answer that
it is its own proper end, and not an appropriated one.
By means of the triangle of majority, equality, and minority
one can formulate questions in three ways. By means of majority
one can ask:
7. Why is God above angels, and angels above man? To which
one must reply that God is above angels because divine goodness,
greatness, etc., are far from quantity as a result of infinity, and
far from time as a result of eternity, whereas an angel’s goodness,
greatness, etc. are not. But the latter are above man’s goodness,
greatness, etc., since the subject in which they exist is far from
4 For this definition, see Part ix, subj. 4 above; the same definition is defended in the
Logica nova (Palma, 1744), p. 10. For another defense of this definitional doctrine, see ch.
6, Question 2 below; see also Part hi, n. 1 above. For the correlative and structural nature
of these definitions, see Gaya, Correlativos, pp. 191, 218.

PART XI

629

division and succession,5 whereas the goodness, greatness, etc. of
a man’s body are not.
The second way is when one asks:
8. Why in the soul are the intellect, will, and memory essentially
equal? To which one must answer: because the first cause, through
the equality of its goodness, greatness, etc. is equally intelligible,
memorable, and lovable. And as a result of this, the intellect re­
alizes that a demonstration can be made in three ways: by cause,
by effect, or by equivalence.6
The third way is when one asks:
9. Why is sin closer to nothingness than to anything else? And
one must state that this is because it is most incompatible with
the purpose of being.
10. Question: Whether the difference between sensual and sensual
is greater than that between sensual and intellectual, and than that
between intellectual and intellectual.
i i. Furthermore, whether the difference between beginning and
middle is greater than that between middle and end.
12. Similarly one can ask about the difference between substance
and substance, etc. And one must reply by means of those things
signified in the above-mentioned triangles, and this subjectively
and objectively using the Rule of B.

3. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE THIRD
FIGURE
It was said in the Third Figure that each principle can be applied
to the other. And thus one may ask:
1. Whether contrariety is as applicable to goodness, greatness,
etc. as is concordance. To which one must reply that it is not, for
contrariety is applied to them by depriving and opposing, whereas
concordance is applied by affirming and according.
In the Third Figure it is stated that goodness is great. And there­
fore one can ask:
2. What is great goodness? And one must reply that great good­
ness is that goodness which, without contrariety and minority,
accords with all the principles and their correlatives.
5 Many of the sources, both manuscript and printed, have susceptione (“receiving, ac­
cepting”?) instead of succession.
6 For these three methods of proof, see Ars demonstrative!, Prologue and nn. 6, 8 there.

630

ARS BREVIS

3. Question: Where is goodness? Turn to the compartment of B
I and extract its meanings.7
4. Question: What does goodness consist of?
5. Question: How is goodness? Turn to the compartments of B
D and B K and extract their meanings. And so on for others.
6. Another question: When is the intellect universal, and when is
it particular?

4. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
FOURTH FIGURE
1. By the compartment of B C D one can ask: Whether any
goodness is as infinitely great as eternity. To which one must
answer yes; otherwise all the greatness of eternity would not be
good.
2. By the compartment of B E F one can ask: Whether God is
as powerful through His goodness as through His intellect. Turn
to that compartment and take from it the things it signifies along
with their correlatives and definitions.
3. Question: Whether an angel, since it is superior, begets an
angel, just as man, who is inferior, begets man. One must answer
that it does not, for an angel does not receive any addition to itself
from the outside, since that would empty it of its essence; man,
however, does, by reason of his body.

5. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
DEFINITIONS OF PRINCIPLES
1. Question: Whether God is a necessary being.
2. Question: Whether unity can be infinite without an infinite
act.
3. Question: Whether there exists a single God.
4. Question: Whether God can be evil. Turn to the definitions
of goodness, greatness, and eternity, and keep in mind what they
7 As Marfal (see Introduction, n. 40 above) points out in his scholium on this passage,
the compartment of B I referred to is explained in the Ars generalis ultima, Part vi, where
Llull says that it exists in itself, in its own good and true concrete things. The compartments
of B D and B K in Question 5 below should also be sought out in the same Part vi of the
Ars generalis ultima.

PART XI

631

signify. For if goodness is great and eternal, then it is necessary
that goodness be the reason, with respect to what is good, great,
and eternal, for producing something good, great, and eternal.
And similarly for other questions that can be asked in relation to
the definitions of principles.

6. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE RULES
1. Question: Whether believing precedes understanding.
2. Question: Which definition is better and clearer, the one given
in terms of a power and its specific act, or the one given by genus
and difference? To which one must reply, the one given in terms
of a power and its specific act, for by means of such a definition
a person can have cognition of the subject and its specific act;
whereas by means of the other one cannot, but only of its parts.8
3. Question: Whether power acts outside its essence.9
4. Question: Whether the intellect is active in memory and pas­
sive in will.
5. Whether the intellect can apprehend an object without the
senses.
6. Whether God’s power can have infinite action.
7. Whether an act can exist without difference.
8. Whether the act belongs to the power or to the object, or to
both.
9. Whether substance can exist by itself without its causes.
10. Whether the will has, in the intellect, the ability to believe,
as well as the intellect to understand in the will.
11. Whether will and memory are equal in the soul.10
12. Whether the intellect without its correlatives can be either
universal or particular.
13. Whether the intellect, when it acquires knowledge, does so
by means of property and difference.
14. Whether the intellect disposes a person to love and remem­
ber, and conversely.
8 Another defense of Llull’s definitional doctrine; cf. n. 4 above.
9 Almost all these questions are answered in Marfal’s scholia. This one here is answered
directly—negatively—in the Liber correlativorum innatorum, ROL vi, 133, line 127.
10 Many of the mss have “unequal” instead of “equal.”

632

ARS BREVIS

15. Whether the intellect can, at one and the same time, believe
and understand.
16. Whether the intellect can acquire knowledge by itself.
17. Question: How does the intellect establish a species?
18. Whether the intellect, through its species, causes the will
and memory to be objects with respect to that species.
And just as we have applied the questions having to do with
the rules to the intellect, so can they be applied to the other powers,
each in its own way.

7. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
TABLE11
1. Question: Whether the world is eternal. Go to the column B
C D and maintain the negative. In the compartment of B C T B
you will find that if it is eternal there are many eternities, differing
in kind, and they are concordant by the compartment B C T C
against the compartment B C T D, which is impossible. It there­
fore follows that one must maintain the negative answer to the
question, and this is proved by the Rule of B.12
2. Question: Whether God can be as infinite by His greatness as
by His eternity. Turn to the column of C D E and to the com­
partment of C D T C, maintaining the affirmative against the
compartment of C D T D.
3. Whether God can do as much through His eternity as through
His intellect. Turn to the column of D E F and to the compartment
of D E T D.
4. Whether God is as powerful through His power as through
His understanding and loving. Turn to the column of E F G and
maintain the affirmative by means of the compartments of E F T
E, E F T F, E F T G, etc. until the entire column is used up.
5. Whether, in God, His intellect and His will are greater than
His virtue. Go to column F G H and maintain the negative
11 Here the text of the Ars generalis ultima (see n. 1 above) reconnects with that of the
Ars brevis. Notice that here we have one question for each of the seven columns of the
Table.
2 For a detailed explanation of the solution to this question, one making use of the same
three compartments, see Ars generalis ultima, the “Quaestio unica” at the end of Part v. For
the problem of the eternity of the world, see Gentile, Bk. n, n. 14.

PART XI

633

throughout all the compartments of said column, extracting the
meanings of those compartments.
6. Whether divine truth is as virtuous through equal correlatives
as is divine will. Go to column G H I and maintain the affirmative
throughout all the compartments of said column.
7. Whether, in God, His virtue, truth, and glory have the where­
withal to be equal, and to be remote from time, place, and mi­
nority. Go to column H I K and maintain the affirmative through­
out all the compartments of said column.

8. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
EVACUATION OF THE THIRD FIGURE
In compartment B C it was said that goodness is great. Now
we ask:
1. Whether goodness is great, and
2. What is its greatness? and
3. In what do goodness and greatness accord? and
4. Whether they can accord without any difference.
To all this one must reply, that goodness is great, as is clear
from the definition of greatness, and its greatness resides in its
possessing its correlatives, as is clear from the Second Species of
Rule C. And they accord because goodness is great through great­
ness, and conversely. But it is impossible for them to accord with­
out the difference of their correlatives.
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about the Evacuation
of the Third Figure. For from what we have said about it, the
artist can formulate and solve questions using the other com­
partments.

9. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
MULTIPLICATION OF THE FOURTH
FIGURE
1. Question: How can the intellect be conditioned to being gen­
eral for the sake of general understanding? Turn to the Multipli­
cation of the Fourth Figure and see how the intellect multiplies
conditions, thereby multiplying objects as well as its own under-

634

ARS BREVIS

standing, so that it will be general and clothed in many different
ways for the sake of much and great scientific knowledge.
And this, in the interest of brevity, is enough about the Mul­
tiplication of the Fourth Figure.

10. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
MIXTURE OF PRINCIPLES AND RULES
1. Question: Whether goodness can be investigated by means of
greatness, duration, etc., and conversely. To which one must reply
yes, by making the subject into predicate, as was shown by the
Third Figure.
2. Question: What is goodness in greatness, duration, etc.? To
which one must reply that in greatness it is great and in duration
enduring.
3. Question: What does goodness have in greatness, duration,
etc.? To which one must say that it has its correlatives which are
great in greatness, and enduring in duration. And what we have
said about goodness applies equally well to the other principles,
each in its own way.
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about Mixture.

11. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE NINE
SUBJECTS

11/1. Questions Relating to the First Subject, Which
is God
1. Question: Whether God exists. The answer is yes, as was
proved in the Questions relating to the First Figure.
2. Question: What is God? To which one must reply that God
is that being whose intrinsic activity is as great as His existence.
3. By the Second Species of Rule C one asks, What does God
possess coessentially in Himself? To which one must reply that
He possesses His correlatives, without which He could not possess
immeasurable and eternal dignities.13
13 The printed sources have “essentially” for the “coessentially” in the question. For
“dignities,” the originals have rationes (Cat. rahons); cf. Part ix, n. 3 above.

PART XI

635

4. By the Third Species one asks, What is God in something
else? To which one must reply that He is creator, governor, and
so on.
5. By the Fourth Species one asks, What does God have in
another thing? To which one must say that in the world He has
power and dominion, and in men judgment, as well as the acts
of grace, mercy, humility, patience, and pity.14
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about God.

11/2. Questions Relating to the Second Subject,
Which Is Angel
1. Question: Whether angels exist. The answer is yes, for if that
which seems to be less similar to God exists, then all the more so
will that which seems to be more similar to God exist.
Moreover, if something composed of body and intellect exists,
all the more so will something composed of intellect and intellect
exist.
Furthermore, if angels did not exist, the ladder of difference and
concordance would be empty, and therefore the world too, which
is impossible.
2. Question: What is an angel composed of, and whose is it? To
which one must reply, by Rule D, that it is composed of itself,
for its essence cannot be made up of points and lines. By the
Second Species of the same rule, it is composed of its spiritual
correlatives, that is to say, of its -tives, -ibles and infinitives.15 By
means of its -tives it is active, by its -ibles it is receptive, and the
infinitive is the act existing between the -tives and -ibles. By the
Third Species one must reply that an angel is God’s.
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about angels.

11/3. Questions Relating to the Third Subject, Which
Is Heaven
1. Whether heaven moves itself. The answer is yes, in order for
its principles to have their own substantial correlatives by means
of its constellations.
14 The Zetzner editions have, “To which one must say that in another thing He has
power and dominion, and in all things judgment as well as the act of grace, mercy, patience,
and pity.
15 De suis -tivis et -bilibus et -are-, cf. Part iv, n. 4 above, and the “Life,” n. 128.

636

ARS BREVIS

2. Whether heaven moves in any direction. The answer is yes,
in a circular direction in itself and with respect to the things beneath
it, but not outside itself. The reason for this is that there is no
action it has or can have outside itself.16
3. Whether an angel moves the heavens. The answer is no, be­
cause if it did then the -tives of its correlatives would be inferior
and its -ibles superior, and thus it would not move the elements
or elemented things by means of its form, but by means of its
matter, which is impossible.
4. Question: Whether heaven has a motive soul. The answer is
yes, for otherwise the sensitive and vegetative powers would not
have motive souls, and the elements would have no motion.
5. One asks by the First Species of Rule E, Why does heaven
exist? To which one must say, because it is made up of its own
form and matter.
6. By the Second Species of Rule E one asks, Why does heaven
exist? To which one must say, in order for things below it to have
motion.
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about heaven.

11/4. Questions Relating to the Fourth Subject,
Which Is Man
1. Question: Whether a man can have greater knowledge of God
by affirming or denying. The answer is, by affirming, for God
does not exist by means of those things without which He exists,
but by means of those things without which He cannot exist.
2. Question: Why does man act by means of a specific form?
Turn to the Second Species of Rule E, where the solution is im­
plied.
3. Whether a man, by increasing his acts, increases his essence.
To which one must reply that no man can act upon himself.
4. Question: When a man wants to remember and cannot, which
is more deficient, his memory or intellect? The answer is his mem­
ory, for it naturally restores former species sooner to the intellect
than to the will.
16 As Marfal points out, Llull does not mean to deny the influence heaven exercises on
things here below, but rather that it cannot send any part of itself outside its own sphere.

PART XI

637

5. Question: In what way do body and soul constitute a man?
The answer is that in man bodily and spiritual goodness make up
a single goodness, and so on for the others.
6. Question: What is the life of man? To which one must reply
that it is that form which is composed of the vegetative, sensitive,
imaginative, and rational powers.
7. What is the death of man? The answer is the dissolution of
the elementative, vegetative, sensitive, imaginative, and rational
powers.
8. Question: Whether man is visible. The answer is no, for sight
can only see colors and figures.17
9. Question: Whether in man intellect and memory are one and
the same power. The answer is no, for if they were, the intellect
would not be successive in its acquisition of species, nor would it
be able to forget them. Also, it would be too strong against free
will in an object.
And this is enough concerning man.

11/5. Questions Relating to the Fifth Subject, Which
Is the Imaginative Faculty18
1. Question: Whether the imaginative faculty imagines imagi­
nable things in the same way that the sensitive faculty senses sen­
sible things.
2. Question: Why is it that the imaginative faculty abstracts spe­
cies from sensible things?19
3. Question: What is the imaginative faculty?
4. Whether the imaginative faculty has correlatives.
5. Whether the imaginative faculty increases by increasing its
activity.
6. Whether the imaginative is a higher power than the sensitive.
17 The explanation of this seemingly mysterious question and answer can be found in
the corresponding part of the Ars generalis ultima, where Llull says, “Whether man is sen­
sible. The answer is no, for accidents are sensible, whereas the substance not at all—it is
however intelligible.”
18 See the corresponding Subject 5 of Part ix above (as well as the section corresponding
to that in the Ars generalis ultima) for answers to the questions of this section.
19 Here Marfal quotes the Ars generalis ultima, Part ix, sect. 5, cap. 1: “if imagination
did not exist, there would be no knowledge of past things, nor would animals know how
to return to a spring, and so on.”

638

ARS BREVIS

7. Whether the imaginative has a specific instinct and appetite.
8. In what way does the sensitive impede the activity of the
imaginative?
9. Why is the imaginative not as strong in sensed things as the
sensitive? Turn to the subject of the imaginative faculty.
10. Question: Whether the sensitive senses the imaginative. To
which one must answer that the inferior powers do not act on the
superior ones.

11/6. Questions Relating to the Sixth Subject, Which
Is the Sensitive Faculty
1. Question: Which of the following powers feels hunger and
thirst—that of taste or touch? To which one must reply, the one
most related to the object.
2. Whether taste uses instinct and appetite to perceive hunger
or thirst, in the same way that sight uses color to perceive a colored
object. Turn to the Second Species of Rule E.20
3. Question: With what does the sensitive faculty sense the things
it senses? To this one must answer that each individual sense senses
its sensible thing by means of its specific form, just as a colored
subject which lies beneath a crystal colors that crystal.
4. Whether the sensitive power has quantity in terms of points
and lines. To which one must answer that the sensitive power
attains its object as readily from far as from near.
5. Whether the sensitive faculty, in the same way that it has a
common sense, also has a common power, instinct, and appetite.
6. What is the sensitive faculty?
7. Through what things is the sensitive faculty common and
particular?
8. From what does the sensitive faculty live and what nourishes
it?
9. Whether the sensitive faculty is sensed. Look under the sub­
ject of the sensitive faculty.
20 Some of the mss and all the printed sources consulted have “Rule C,” which is surely
wrong. Cf. Ars generalis ultima (Palma, 1645), p. 248, par. 29; note that if it were Rule C,
then it would have to be the third and not the second species (loc. cit., par. 23).

PART XI

639

11/7. Questions Relating to the Seventh Subject,
Which Is the Vegetative
1. Whether the vegetative acts by means of its own species.21
2. If there is any reason by which the vegetative is common and
particular, like the sensitive faculty.
3. Whether the quantity of the vegetative is expressible in terms
of points and lines.
4. Question: What is the vegetative and what does it possess in
itself, according to the Second Species of Rule C?22
5. Question: From what does the vegetative live, gain its nour­
ishment, and grow, and in what subject is it planted?
6. What constitutes the death of the vegetative? Turn to the
subject of the vegetative, in which the solutions to the above ques­
tions are implied.

11/#. Questions Relating to the Eighth Subject,
Which Is the Elementative
1. What is the elementative?
2. Whether the elementative, like the sensitive, has many spe­
cies.
3. Whether the elementative has its correlatives.
4. Whether the candle’s flame elementates the wick of the lamp
when it lights it.23
5. Whether the candle’s flame lights the wick by means of air
just as sight sees a colored object by means of light.
6. Whether the elementative is the special cause of length,
breadth, depth, and fullness.
7. Whether the elementative is the common species of the ele­
ments.
21 Marfal adds, “The answer is yes,” after Questions 1 and 3, which the two eighteenthcentury Majorcan editions copied as if these replies were part of Llull’s text.
22 The “D” of the last three Zetzner editions is clearly a mistake.
23 That is, impregnates the wick with an element (cf. OED, s.v. elementate), in this case,
of course, fire. Marfal points out that both this and the next question should be answered
in the affirmative. For similar questions concerning one candle lighting another, see the
passages corresponding to Felix, Bk. iv, ch. 20, n. 14, and Ars demonstrativa, Dist. iv, n.
160.

640

ARS BREVIS

8. Whether the elementative can exist in a subject when the
elements themselves are removed from it.
9. Whether the elementative can be the source of points, lines,
and figures.24
10. Whether the elementative impels itself as naturally with its
instinct and appetite, lightness, heaviness, heat and so on, as man
does artificially with his feet.
11. Whether the elementative can have a nature without sub­
stantial correlatives.
12. Whether the elements exist in act in elemented things.
13. Whether the elementative is continuous in quantity every­
where in the sublunary world.
14. Whether there exist two heats, two drynesses, two white­
nesses, and so on. Turn back to the Subject of Elementative, and
extract from it the solutions,25 with the intellect conditioned and
fashioned by this Art.
15. Whether there exists a fifth element. The answer is no, for
in elemented things four complexions suffice.

11/9. Questions Relating to the Ninth Subject, Which
Is the Instrumentative
Since above we have already formulated questions concerning
natural instrumentality, we will here formulate those concerning
morality.
1. Question: What is morality?
2. Question: What is justice, prudence, etc.?
3. Another question: What is avarice, gluttony, etc.? Turn back
to the Ninth Subject of Instrumentative, and do what that treatise
indicates.
4. Yet another question: Whether justice is good. The answer is
yes; for if it were not, injustice would not be evil.
5. A farther question: Whether justice has correlatives. The an­
swer is yes; for if not, there could exist no just condition, nor any
things in which it could be sustained and situated.
24 Instead of the Jons, “source,” of the printed sources and many mss, many other mss
have finis, “end, purpose.”
25 With this plural, Llull is presumably referring not only to this question, but also to
the previous thirteen of this section.

PART XI

641

Following these examples, one can formulate questions relating
to justice by means of all its principles and rules. And what we
have said about justice can be applied to the other virtuous con­
ditions.
6. Whether the vices are simply privative principles. The answer
is yes, for they have no concordance with the virtues. In the vir­
tues, for their part, the doer, the doable, and the instruments are
in accord in the virtuous object.
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about moral matters,
especially since in the Ars magna we have dealt with them at
length.26

12. QUESTIONS RELATING TO THE
HUNDRED FORMS
Questions relating to the Hundred Forms can be formulated in
as many ways as each form is different in accordance with the
Nine Subjects, like “entity,” for instance, which is one form in
God, another in angel, yet another in heaven, etc., as when one
asks:
1. Whether God’s entity is the origin of all other entities. The
answer is yes, because His goodness is the origin of all goodnesses,
His greatness of all greatnesses, His eternity of all durations, etc.
The same, however, cannot be said of an angel’s entity, that of
heaven, etc. And thus a form, according to how it is different
from others, must be examined by means of its own principles
and rules.
2. Question: Whether essence and being are convertible. To
which one must answer that in God they convert with one another,
for in God nothing is superior or inferior. In angels, heaven, etc.,
however, they do not convert, since being exists in them through
essence, and not conversely, and therefore in such things essence
is superior and being inferior.
Questions can be formulated in one way concerning God’s
unity, and in another concerning an angel’s unity, in another con­
cerning the unity of heaven, etc., as when one asks:
26 There Llull gives two sets of questions (per prittcipia and per regulas) for each vice and
each virtue.

642

ARS BREVIS

3. Whether it is the function of God’s unity to unite the infinite.
The answer is yes, for if that unity did not unite the infinite, then
it could not itself be infinite, because its power would be finite
and constrained, and it would be idle in eternity, and the same
could then be said of divine goodness, greatness, etc., which is
impossible.
4. If, however, one asks about an angel’s unity, whether its
function is to unite, the answer must be in accordance with the
conditions of its unity. That is to say that an angel can, in a moral,
objective way of speaking, be united to another in a single loving,
a single understanding, and a single bonifying."7 I do not say,
however, that an angel can become one with another angel, since
it cannot, as has already been explained. Nor can heaven become
one with another heaven. The unity of heaven, however, is the
effective cause of inferior unities. But the unity of man is not like
this, for one person can join another to produce a third. And
similarly with other things, each in its own way.
5. Whether there is plurality in God. To which one should an­
swer yes, with respect to His correlatives as exemplified in the
Second Species of rule C, without which He could not have in
Himself an infinite and eternal operation bonifying, magnifying,
eternalizing, etc., as a result of which His dignities would be con­
strained and idle, which is impossible. The plurality of an angel,
however, is not like this, for an angel is composed of -tive and
-ible with respect to God’s simplicity. And likewise heaven is more
composite than an angel, and man more than heaven.
6. Question; Whether in God there is a nature. To which one
must answer yes, so that He may have natural remembering, un­
derstanding, and loving, as well as natural goodness, greatness,
etc.; also so that these very dignities may be natural to Him in
order for him to produce infinite and eternal good for the purpose
of naturizing. An angel’s nature, however, is not like this, for it
is finite and newly created. It does, however, have the function
of naturizing, since it has innate and natural species with which it
objectively and naturally objectifies. And thus one can also speak
of the nature of heaven in its own way, as well as according to
27 Instead of bonificare, the Zetzner editions have homificare, “manifying”. The previous
“moral . . . way of speaking” (tnoraliter) should probably be taken in the sense of “fig­
urative,” or even “spiritual” (vs. “physical”).

PART XI

643

its principles and its natural and specific rules, with which it nat­
urally and specifically acts. And similarly one can discuss the other
subjects, each in its own way.
From what we have said above, the artist can formulate ques­
tions concerning the Hundred Forms and solve them in accordance
with how the questions are variously treated and derived by means
of the Nine Subjects which differ from one another, by observing
for each Form the definition of it we gave above. And thus the
intellect learns in what way it can be most general in formulating
many questions and solving them by the method indicated in the
Evacuation of the Third Figure and in the Multiplication of the
Fourth Figure. As a result, who could possibly enumerate all the
questions and solutions that could be thus formulated?
And this, for the sake of brevity, is enough about questions
relating to the Hundred Forms.

PART XII, WHICH TREATS
OF HABITUATION'
This

part deals with habituation to the Art, and it is divided into

three parts, the first of which is itself divided into thirteen parts
corresponding to the thirteen divisions of the Art. And the artist
of this Art should become familiar with them, so that he may
know how to apply a question to that place or those places which
are related to the question, in accordance with how analogous they
are to the matter of the question.
The second part states that he should become familiar with the
method and procedure of the text of this Art, keeping to the
method of the text for proving and solving other questions, that
is, using the method by which they are presented in the text, just
as one example can be used to exemplify and explain another.
The third part states that he should become familiar with the
method for multiplying questions and solutions towards one and
the same conclusion, as is indicated in the Third and Fourth Figures
and in the Table.
And this, for reasons of brevity, is enough about habituation.
1 Artus, Ars Brevis, pp. 113 and 309, translates this word as “(learning and) mastering
the Art.” I have kept the English homonym to tie it in with “habit” (Part x, “Hundred
Forms,” no. 21), although I have sometimes used “become familiar with” in the text itself.

PART XIII, WHICH TREATS
OF THE METHOD FOR
TEACHING THIS ART
This

part is divided into four parts.

The first part states that the artist should know the Alphabet
by heart, as well as the figures, definitions, and rules, along with
the arrangement of the Table.
The second part states that he should explain the text well to
his students, by rational means, and not bind himself by the au­
thority of others. And the students should read through the text,
and if they have any doubts, they should ask the artist or teacher
about them.
The third part states that the teacher or artist should formulate
questions in front of the students and solve them rationally, ac­
cording to the method of the Art. For without reason the artist
cannot make proper use of the Art. And it should be understood
that the Art has three friends, which are subtlety of intellect, rea­
son, and good intentions,1 without which no one can learn this
Art.
The fourth part states that the artist should put questions to the
students, so they may answer them; and he should have them
multiply their arguments toward one and the same conclusion.
Moreover, they should find2 the places by reason of which they
will know how to answer and multiply. If, however, the students
do not know how to answer, multiply reasons, or to find the right
places, then the artist or teacher should teach them the abovementioned things.
1 Le Myesier quotes this phrase twice in the Electorium (see Hillg, p. 399, n. 6).
2 For this use of invenire (Cat. atrobar) see Ars demonstrative^ Dist. hi, n. 16.

EPILOGUE
THE END OF THIS ART
To the honor and praise of God and for the public good Ray­
mond finished this book in the monastery of Saint Dominic1 of
Pisa in the month of January of the year 1307 of the Incarnation
of our Lord Jesus Christ.2 Amen.
1 The oldest mss of works written by Llull at Pisa in 1307-8 refer to the (Cistercian)
monastery of San Donnino, for which “Saint Dominic” might well be an error (a lectio
facilior') introduced by a few later scribes and copied by the rest. Cf. Hillg, p. 99 and n.
204; for a contrary opinion see M. Batllori in OE I, 52, n. 153.
2 January 1308 by our reckoning.

