INTRODUCTION.
There are a number of person's *with abundance
of ideas, stores offacts^and considerable facility
of composition, wht desire to "write 'upon special
topics, and yet fail when they attempt, or who
fear to attempt lest they may meet failure, simply
because they
lack methodical arrangement.
Once started upon a proper plan, they would not
alone get along smoothly, but their work would

it,

be creditable, and ihc'ourse of time, vrh^rt practice
brought perfection, possibly brilliant. Constant
practice, upon modeis and with ths outlines we
propose to furnish, wili in a great measure supply
the lack of systematic training. Nor is it likely,
beginning on the same skeleton, if a hundred
were to do
any two would produce similar

8

SKELETON ESSAYS.

results, nor could the original skeleton be fully
traced in the perfect and completed figure.
Hence the preparation of this book, which will
supply a need long existing, and a demand which
though moderate, is steady, and sure to increase.
It presents a number of skeletons, or outlines, of
essays on a variety of topics, and in some
instances these are followed by completed work,
in order to show the reader how it is done.
These skeletons can be used as they are written,
or to an ingenious writer they may serve as hints,
and be modified, varied or almost entirely de
parted from, as taste and ability may suggest.
It must be borne in mind also that these skele
tons are merely useful foundations, or breeders of
valuable hints for .those unaccustomed to method
ical arrangsrfl£jrt,-and then use does not neces
sarily detract'- .from the :<£r;ginality of the work
which niay.'folloYV. No one'denies the beauty and
artistic merit of Parnell's "Hermit," yet the story
and the main incidents are to", be found in Gesta
Rom'andxuin, a collection of stories written by the
monks 7Ji'.the middle ages —the same source from
from whi^-h Shakespeare ha? taken almost bodily
his "Pericles^ Prince of Tyre,— No one doubts
the weird ;6yi£inalty of Poe's )* Raven," because
the advent .of Jhe bird as interlocutor is to be
found in the Nodes Ambrosiatice, or because the
rythm, tone, and some of the lines are borrowed
from Mrs. Browning's "Lady Geraldine's Court-

SKELETON ESSAYS.

9

ship." It is the mode of handling the subject,
not the positive newness of all the parts, or all the
ideas, in which the originality consists.
The
skeleton of the figure is lost to view beneath the
flesh and the drapery.
The kinds of composition which have to be
built upon a previously prepared frame work,
may be the essay, which may be divided into the
essay proper, the lecture, the speech, the oration
and the sermon, and the tale or the play. Of
the three last named it is not our purpose to treat;
nor of the first four shall we have anything to say
about the speech, or oration, which should be
extempore, nor even hints as to outlines of faets,
since we have, in a previous work,* to which the
reader is referred, given the fullest instructions
on that subject.
The Essay proper is meant to be printed for
the general reader ; the Lecture, to be read to an
audience by its author ; the Speech to be given
orally, and generally during the discussion of a
moot topic, and the Oration, to be delivered
upon a stated occasion.
* Model Speeches on all School Occasions, etc., etc., with Practical
Hints on Extempore Speaking. By Christol Ogden. Kew York : Pick it
Fitzgerald.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

10

ESSAYS.
The Essay proper treats a subject for the general
It is properly brief, terse, and with no
reader.
more extraneous matter than is necessary to en

That addition must be
force the main idea.
pertinent to the subject, unless where the essay is
of a jocose nature, or assumes a humorous tone,
when greater latitude may be allowed.
In order to show how the essay may be built
upon the frame-work, and yet in some measure
conceal its origin, we give a skeleton of an essay
upon a subject not apt to be chosen, and follow it
by two completed essays, one of a serious, and
the other of rather humorous turn, if not approach
ing to flippancy.
LIGHT,

NEW AND OLD.

A SKELETON ESSAY.
The nature

of light

considered.

Theories : —

i. That it is composed of particles emitted from
a luminous centre

;

That it is created by waves or undulations by
action of the luminous body upon an elastic
2.

medium
3.

;

(Lorenz Oken's), that it is

a polar

tension

SKELETON ESSAYS.

11

of ether, evoked by the sun, and that heat is the
motion of this ether.

" Light," in any Encyclopedia or
[Consult the article
any elementary work on Optics, or Natural Philosophy,
to refresh the memory. ]

Artificial light and its production.

The old

methods.
Take up the tinder-box, or the friction
of the savage, where fire and Jjght are produced
by rubbing two sticks. The " burning-glass ",
Archimedes's mirrors, if you choose. Then con
trast the new modes, the friction match, etc.
Consider the materials used in the production
of light in the old days — the pine torch, the tallow
and wax candles and the oil lamp. Trace then
the rise of kerosene and gas, and the electric

light.

That is physical and actual light It is merely
introductory to the consideration of the mental
and metaphorical light, in the past and to-day.
The old lights in literature.
Of the elder
essayists there were Addison, Steele and others.
Then followed Johnson and Goldsmith, and later
Sydney Smith and Washington Irving. These
were the old lights.
Contrast these with Curtis, Thoreau, " Mark

Twain" and others of the new.
In the same way take up the older novelists,
Fielding, Smolletand Richardson, with afterwards
Scott and Cooper.
Then, chief of the new lights are Thackeray

12

SKELETON ESSAYS.

and Dickens, with Trollope, Farjeon, Black and
Howells, bringing up the rear.
In poetry, the eld lights. Shakespeare, Milton,
and Shelley, with
Pope, Byron, Coleridge
Tennyson, Browning, Swinburne, Longfellow and
Lowell, as the new.
Hamilton, Jefferson,
The old light in politics.
Madison, Ames, Quincy, Macon and others, con
trasted with those of the present day.
The old methods of controversial politics, and
the intrusting of office mainly to honest and
competent men. There are doubts whether we
have degenerated in that respect. If we have, it
is not because we are any worse than our fathers
inherently. Our defects are greater in amount
since we have a larger population, and our
activity, and the zeal of journalists make them
If greater in specific instances it is
more public.
because of the increase of wealth, and the con
centration of capital in fewer hands, who use
money in politics as a means of increasing
wealth.
The old light in morals. There was more form
and ceremony, but whether there was more
morality then, abstractly considered, is doubtful.
The old letters that occasionally get into print
through antiquarian research, show that men were
actuated then as now, at times, by base motives,
and that the old light, in this respect, was no
brighter than the new. There are larger prizes

SKELETON ESSAYS.

13

now to provoke the greed of gain, hence wrong is
bolder, and conscience more easily overpowered.
[Here instances may be cited from the history of the
past and the present]

The old rascality was smaller in gross amount,
but proportionately it was the same.
After all the new light is preferable to the old.
In literature, politics and morals, it is broader and
more lasting, as in its physical form, its methods
and materials have improved.
If the poor man
has less to hope for in a struggle for material
growth, if there be greater obstacles in his road
to competence, his lot is a better one than in the
old times. What were then comforts are now
necessities ; what were once luxuries are now
comforts.
On this skeleton we build two completed essays, each
capable of much further expansion, and with different
mode of handling ; and a number of diverse ones can
be made, when once the train of thought is started.

1,

LIGHT, NEW AND OLD.

FIRST ESSAY.

It

is difficult to determine whether there has
been a greater change in light, as a physical and

actual thing, or in light, as a mental and
metaphorical thing, during the century.
Both
have apparently changed. In light, physically,

U

SKELETON ESSAYS.

the improvement has been marked ; in light,
mentally, improvement is a disputed point. If it
exist, it is accompanied with corresponding dis
advantages.
The nature of light, whether natural or artificial,
is not entirely settled. There are several theories.
The old one, that light is composed of infinitesimal
particles, directly emitted from the centre of
illuminating. Afterwards, it was more generally
held that light is the result of undulations of an
elastic medium, through the direct action of the
illuminating body. A later theory, that of Lorenz
Oken, is coming into favor. This holds that light
is a polar tension of ether, evoked by the luminous
body, and that heat is the production of the
motion of this ether.
The apparent source of natural light is the sun,
whether its rays be transmitted, as the old theory
would have it, direct as in day-light, or by reflec
tion, as in moonlight. But neither of these being
always available,artificial light is ofttimes required.
The savage, in the rudest condition of mankind,
needs light, or the fire which accompanies it, and
he soon learns to produce both by the friction of
two sticks of rotten wood. The use of fragments
of pine, or other resinous wood, for torches, is a
natural contrivance.
Civilization brought flint
and steel, with the accompanying tinder-box.
These were used for ages to produce light on an
emergency, or fire for domestic purposes, though

SKELETON ESSAYS.

15

the latter alone could be had, when the sun
shone, through the agency of the double convex
That, and the
lens, known as the burning-glass.
concentration of sun's rays by means of mirrors,
were known to the ancients. Suddenly, during
the first quarter of the present century, an in
ventive genius, well enough versed in chemistry to
know that chlorate of potasga could be made to
ignite any inflammable substance by bringing it in
contact with a mineral acid, produced the contriv
ance known as " Etnas." The properties of phos
phorus were called on for a similar method, and
the " Lucifers ", where a flat match was lit by
being drawn lightly through folded sand paper,
came into vogue. They were the half way house
on the road to the present friction matches, that
have been cheapened until they are within the
reach of the poorest, and are consumed by the
million daily.
Certainly the materials used in public or private
for the continuous evolution of light, have also
In the old days they thought they
improved.
had reached perfection when they replaced the
pine torch with candles of wax or tallow, and the
lamp of oil. With these they illuminated their
houses and made a faint attempt to light the
avenues. But up came gas, and, except in out of
the way places, replaced all these. Where gas
cannot be made, the refined petroleum brought
from the bowels of the earth, takes the place of

16

SKELETON ESSAYS.

oil, furnishing a brighter light at less cost, and
just as men begin to speculate whether the crude
materials for gas and kerosene will not ere long
become exhausted, the electric light appears.

As with the physical,

so with mental illumin

ation.
We have new lights in literature and
politics, and we have new lights in morals.
The brilliancy of the old lights of literature is
not impaired by that of the new. Every age
seems to have its own sun and stars in the sky ofletters. Around Addison circled other essayists
of note ; Goldsmith was the centre of another
system ; so was Washington Irving ; so was
Swift ; so was Sydney Smith. In poetry Shake
speare was a sun around which revolved rare Ben
Jonson, Marlowe and the rest.
Byron, Scott,
Coleridge, Shelley, Keats and Southey took the
same position in their time. The writers around
us do not seem to have attained the same rank.
But the obscure of to-day are the noted of
to-morrow ; the dwarfs of the present are the
The sum total of the literary
giants of the future.
work of the present is greater than in the past ;
men that in a previous period would have attracted
attention are lost among the number of really
clever men. Trollope, Collins, Farjeon, Howells,
and a dozen others among novelists ; Tennyson,
Whittier, Swinburne,
Browning,
Longfellow,
and many more among poets ; Curtis, Thoreau,
James and others among essayists, embody in the
new light a radiance of no mean power.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

17

The new light in politics seems but dim in
comparison with the old. Is it really so ? It is

to be doubted whether Richelieu was more clever
in his time than Bismarck now ; Mazarin more
astute than Cavour, or the older Pitt abler than

Gladstone.

Looking to our Country, Jefferson, Hamilton,
Madison, Quincy, Ames, Macon, Calhoun and
Webster have seemed to be without successors.
It must be borne in mind that part of these men
flourished at a time when the policy of the govern
ment was being shaped, when there were problems
of statesmanship to be solved, or circumstances
arising that developed latent intellectual power.
To-day, the questions to be settled are different.
The general policy of the State is determined, and
though one party may drift toward centralization,

and the other toward extreme municipal self-con

trol, yet neither can get far from the just balance

of

power settled by the Constitution, and by its
judicial interpretation. The points at issue in
political contests now are meaner than before.
They involve money rather than abstract principle,
though at bottom there is a hidden contest of
systems.

The new light in politics burns low and flickers
at times, but the same source of brilliancy is there,
and if need come, it would be turned up, and
blaze. Great occasions often breed great men,
and always bring such to the front.

18

SKELETON ESSAYS.
The old light in morals seems at first view to

But when we read the
old time correspondence which is dragged from
obscurity from time to time, we learn that the
men of the early days of the republic were not
always prompted by the higher motives, and that
much of the brilliancy of their actions was dimmed
be brighter than the new.

slander, and
by envy, meanness, treachery,
avarice.
In morals, poor human nature, then as now, did
not always trim its lamp cleanly, nor furnish a
During the most perilous
pure oil for burning.
parts of the Revolutionary struggle, we find that
the Congress committed injustice as a body some
times, and that not a few of its members engaged
in intrigues, and manifested the most contemptible
jealousy of each other. If there be more dis
regard for right and honor now, it is only propor
tionate to the greater number of people, and the
There are more scamps, because
larger field.
there are more men. If we have to-day combina
tions of knaves to plunder their fellow-men by;
means of syndicates and trusts, it is because the
wealth of the country has grown so much, that it
has necessarily concentrated in fewer hands, and
that this aggregation of wealth in the few stimu
lates their avarice. But the fact that the rich are
growing richer, and the poor, poorer, is counter
balanced by the reserved power that the poorer
masses retain to change or at least modify this

SKELETON ESSAYS.

19

The
through the machinery in their hands.
general tone of society, and the comforts of the
poor, are increased ; and no one who studies our
condition aright can fail to perceive that the
aggregated virtue and morality is as great now as
at any period of our history.
Both the physical and mental new lights are
preferable to the old ; and, however the pessimist
may talk of modern degeneracy, he would not go
back to the old light, and to the old condition
«
of affairs, if he could.

LIGHT; NEW AND OLD.
SECOND ESSAY.

There are, as every one knows, or is presumed
to know, two theories long prevailing in regard to
the origin and nature of light. One is that its
particles are projected from a luminous body, as
the sun for instance, with a swiftness of 198,000
miles to the second. The other holds that light
is produced by the action of the luminous body

itself upon

all

a subtle and elastic medium pervading

These have somewhat given way to
" Light," he says, " is
a third theory by Oken.
but a polar tension of ether evoked by a central
space.

body in antagonism with the planets, and heat is
the motion of this ether." This doctrine is doubt
less very clear, so far as the great central body is

SKELETON ESSAYS.

20

a

it

it,

it,

concerned, and is becoming accepted ; but that
is for natural light. When it comes to the artifi
cial, and is produced by a friction match, it results
from the antagonism of the coated end of the little
stick with the sandpaper, boot-soles, trouser-leg
or door-jamb.
If the match happens to break,
certainly if two break in succession, profanity as
well as light is apt to be evolved.
Whatever be its nature, there is no doubt that
light travels much faster than sound, and very
much faster than a solid body projected through
In former days, when the old-fashioned
space.
flint lock fowling-piece was in use, the sportsman
was rarely able to hit the wild-duck known as the
didapper. The fowl would dive at the flash of the
powder, and the shot would strike the water at
the spot he had been.
But though light itself always moved rapidly,
the method of making it artificially made slow
progress for ages. It was not until this century,
when the old tinder-box, with the
and well into
flint and steel to make the spark, the charred rag
to a
and the sulphur match to bring
to catch
flame, gave way to easier methods.
The older folk well remember the rising to strike
light at any hour of the night, the abraded
fingers where the old rasp or bit of steel struck
the skin instead of the flint, and all the other dis
comforts of the situation.
Then came the " Etnas." You dipped a

SKELETON ESSAYS.

21

match in a bottle, and a flame was kindled, as a
bottle or two very frequently kindled a flame
between two people, before and since.
This contrivance was followed by the Lucifer,
where a flat piece of thin wood, the end coated
with inflammable matter, was drawn through
sanded paper.
At last came the present friction match, made
by millions, and for the million. This has been
supposed to be the no-farther-beyond of all inven
tion ; but before long man will only have to turn
a button, and light will break out of darkness.
Not only has there been improvement in the
mode of evoking light, but also in the materials
by which its evolution is made continuous. The
old lamp, with its foul and ill-smelling whale oil,
and the tallow dip, with its attendant snuffers, has
given way to kerosene, which adds to its power
of illumination, great capacity for firing cities,
and reducing the number of servant girls.
The troublesome wax taper, with an indefinite
capacity for guttering and dropping cataracts of
cereous matter on coats and carpets, has given
way to gas, the daily consumption of which is
regulated, not by the housekeeper, but by the con
scientious gentleman who copies the record from
And now, after ineffectual invasions
the meter.
by hydro-oxygen and burning magnesium, in
comes electricity, and beside its other offices, pro
poses to light, and actually does light house and

A'

22

SKELETON ESSAYS.

street so cheaply and brilliantly as to drive gas
away, and effectually embarrass the plans of the
Standard Oil Company.

But the new light and the old of which we treat
have nothing to do after all with those we have
cited. The lights we refer to are not physical
and material, but mental and abstract, they are
the new lights which are driving out the old in
literature, politics and morals ; and, if they be
not of an electrical nature in other respects, they

of
those of the old school who have not grown up in
are at .least calculated to shock the sensibilities
'

the progressive wickedness of the new.
Thus in literature, the new essayists, poets and
novelists differ in style, method and character
from their predecessors.
The old essayists,
Addison, Steele and Goldsmith, had something
to say, and could say it charmingly. Later on,
Sydney Smith, Macaulay and Washington Irving
could do the same. But they never attempted to
make bricks without straw.
The new literary light bearers not only do
without straw, but frequently without clay, and
the bricks but half baked at that. It is the same
way with the new lights of poetry and fiction.
Authors write to please their readers — the wares
must suit the customer, or he takes his basket
and his dollar to another shop.
The public now
demands light literary ware of another kind than
that required by our fathers. Instead of the tinder

SKELETON ESSAYS.

23

and flint and steel of Byron, Milton or Coleridge,
they want the friction matches of Swinburne and

Walt Whitman, with the match-box a little dirty.
They will not put up with the wax candles of
Scott or Cooper or Thackeray, so long as the gas
of " She," and " Robert Elsmere " is flaring, with
a leak in the gas pipe which fills the room with a
stench offensive to the moral nostrils. The old
light of literature has been enclosed in a dark
lantern, the new light is a will o' the wisp. As
for the old and new light in politics, the contrast
is equally as strong. There never was a time in
this country — nor in fact in any country having
a nominally free government, where the trickster
and demagogue did not come to the top. The
fiercer the popular pot boils the more scum comes
to the surface. But when the old light illumined
the judgment of the people, the majority of those
to whom public trusts were confided were respect
able.
There were not enough scallywags in
place to leaven the lump. The highest places at
least were reserved for the capable and generally
for the honest. That suited the almost " dim,
religious light" of the time. Now-a-day, brazen
rascality and impudent incompetency spread
themselves in the broad glare of the electric arc,
and the public, dazzled by the new lights, are
incapable of seeing the knaves as they are.
It is in morals, however, where the remarkable
difference between the new and old lights is

24

SKELETON E8SATS.

It may be a difference of grade and
shown.
amount merely, but it is very great. They had
clever rascals in the olden time, some of them
quite skilled in the arts of turpitude, and possibly
as many in proportion as exist to-day.
There
were liars, robbers of the poor, and scamps mis
cellaneous. But they were petty offenders.
The
best, by which we mean the worst of them,
alongside of those who now infest the community
outside of our jails, were mere lamp-oil scallawags, while ours blaze in the effulgence of an
electric light often thousand candle power. Our
modern Arnolds would not have held out under
a million, nor would their treachery have required
wrong to provoke it. The money alone would
have been the motive. Our defaulters do not
stoop to a paltry thousand. Poor Toby Watkins,
a half century since, was behind a few dollars in
his accounts with government, or rather he had
mislaid some vouchers, and there was more stir
about it than would be made to-day over the
flight of twenty bank cashiers to Canada. Old
Bob Swartwout disputed with the government
He was proclaimed a
about an allowance.
defaulter, and the word " Swartwout-" became a
popular verb, the synonyme of which was "to
peculate." Years rolled on, and gradually the
accounts of Swartwout having been thoroughly
examined, it was found that the government owed
a small balance to him.
The verb " to Swart

SKELETON ESSAYS.

25

"
wout lost its force, and disappeared from all
dictionaries but those of fools.
Under our present brilliant new light, pecula
tion and defalcation are merely parts of deft
financiering, and, if it be done in partnership,
though one of the gang may get to prison, to be
let out when quiet settles down, another of the
conspirators may arise to great distinction in the

public service.
Under the old light, they punished the en
grosser, the regrater and the forestaller, and all
those petty rogues who combined together to
enhance the prices of potatoes or smoked herring.
With the new light this is changed. Things are
done on a magnificent scale. The most upright
citizens, faithful husbands, tender fathers, com
passionate philanthropists and pious Christians,
do not hesitate to join a coal combine, a flour
trust or an oil monopoly, or some other con
spiracy to regrate, engross or forestall the fuel,
the light, the food or clothing of the poor.
There is no fear of punishment hereafter either,
for under the glare of the new light the doctrines
of orthodoxy have disappeared ; and the rich
man feels that he will be able to exist in the
nether regions comfortably, barring a slight tropi
cal temperature ameliorated by sherry cobblers
well supplied with pounded ice.
Yet let us not complain of the disadvantages
attending the improvement of methods and

SKELETON ESSAYS.

26

materials of illumination. It is accompanied by
Luxuries have
so much that is good otherwise.
become comforts and comforts, necessaries, so
that we can bear some of the attendant evils, and
feel courage to fight them.
Where there is a very bright light, the dark
ness must be deeper, or seems so by contrast.
Taken altogether the new light may not be so
bad after all.
Certainly no one desires to go
back to the tinder-box for physical, nor to the
old almanac for mental illumination.
Having thus shown how the complete essay may be
brought from the outline, and how diverse these growths
may be, we now proceed to give a number of such bits of
frame-work, or a number of topics, capable of the same
treatment by a careful writer, and training him thus to a
method which will enable him in time to make an out
line of any subject for himself.

SKELETON ESSAYS.
IS MARRIAGE A FAILURE?

This is a sensational question that has been
discussed of late, in the absence of interesting
topics.

Ideally considered, every human institution is
more or less a failure, because

every human in

SKELETON ESSAYS.
stitution

is imperfect

;

27

if not in itself, then since

human beings are themselves not perfect, and
because it is subject to the passions, faults and
follies of mankind.
By a large portion of the human race, marriage
is held to be divinely ordained, and assumes the
dignity of a sacrament. With others again it
sinks to the level of a mere contract between two
of opposite sexes.
Setting aside the religious view, and looking
at it as laymen, the question whether it is, or is
not a failure, can be readily determined.
We
have to consider the objects of the institution, and
whether these have or have not been more or less
fulfilled, and to ascertain their fulfilments we have
to approach it in a practical, and not a theoretical

spirit.

The objects of marriage are various.

In
of

a state of extreme barbarism the connection
the sexes is brutal, even though not depraved.

Man takes

a wife by brute force, and the marital

connection is maintained at his pleasure, and dis
solved at his whim.
Woman, being physically the weaker, is his
slave. The wife has no respect Even the sacred
motherhood does not ensure her respect.
But from barbarism man at length emerges,
and the first evidence of his civilization is shown
in the increased regard and respect paid to the
opposite sex. The basest husband learns at last

28

SKELETON ESSAYS.

to cherish his wife, mainly through recollections
of his childhood, and veneration for his mother.
His children form a bond between him and their
mother, and he desires very soon to confer dignity
on his mate.
Hence very early in the history of all peoples,
begin certain forms and ceremonies to distinguish
He de
marriage from illicit conversation.
sires to mark his children as his own, and his
wife as his. As civilization advances the position
of woman improves. Here then is one object of
the institution of marriage, and it is certainly not
a failure in that.
Man whether savage or civilized, is jealous of
the right of property.
What is his he desires to
be exclusively his own.
And this is more
especially true when it is in any way connected
with the most engrossing and tenderest passion
of the heart. Marriage determines this, and its
institution in this regard is not a failure.
No matter how depraved a man may be, he is
more or less attached to his offspring. He may
not have for them the overwhelming and absorb
ing love of the mother, but he desires their health,
He knows
growth, progress and prosperity.
that they cannot receive the gentle but firm dis
cipline, and the careful culture required for their
well-being, without the influence of home. A
father cannot make a home unaided. It requires
a mother.
And a wife who is not placed on

SKELETON ESSAYS.

29

is

it,

more or less an equal plane with her husband,
whose status is not recognized and defined, and
who has no control of the household in the
absence of man, can not make a home. She is
degraded in the eyes of her children, who would
never learn without her to love the father, but
would merely obey him through fear.
One of the main objects of marriage is to create
the home, and in a majority of instances, it
succeeds. Certainly, without it, there would be
no home at all.
Another object of marriage is to supply by con
stant association a bond of attachment between
the parties, which becomes stronger, often un
conscious to the parties themselves, in after life,
and to replace the fire of passion with the purer
flame of friendship and esteem.
If this object be
not always attained, it does not prove the failure,
since as we have before urged, there is no ideally
perfect success in any purpose of man.
To cite unhappy marriages as proof that the
institution is a failure, is fallacious.
There is
nothing more common than commercial partner
ships. Their main object is increased power for
The object yokes
gain by the combination.
together those of different views, tempers and in
clinations. Now and then they quarrel, and they
They can do
dissolve their connection.
because there
no product of their partnership
for which each feels a continued responsibility.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

30

Marriage, having created this responsibility, can
not be dissolved in the same way.
But who, because partners quarrel, argues
therefrom that partnership in business is a failure ?
Human government, however skilfully devised,
is filled with instances of wrong and oppression.
The strong uses it to crush the weak. The poor
man frequently finds obstacles in his road to
comfort.
Despotic or free, the same results
attend it. Is all human government a failure
So the
then, and
must it be destroyed ?
Anarchists say. But when you come to consider
their writings, you find that even they concede
Their destruction
the necessity of government.
They propose
after all involves reconstruction.
to overthrow those who govern, and become gov
ernors themselves.
Is all government a failure ?
Let us consider what would be the consequence
It does
to society if marriage were abolished.
not require a statement of the necessary result
to fix upon the mind the social chaos that would
ensue.

Unquestionably married life is full of instances
of the union of couples, unfitted for the condition,
and unsuited to each other. A young couple
pleased with each other's looks or manners, rashly
assume an indissoluble tie, to find the chain a
clog.

The failure in that case is not in marriage, but
in them.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

31

Now there are thousands of happy homes where
couples are mated as well as matched, and many
others where there is at least as much happiness
as the parties would probably have had apart.
But were the unhappy marriages twice as many,
it would not justify the abolition of the institution.
There are few unhappy husbands or wives who

would like to see their children stigmatised as
illegitimate. And if it be not the intent to abolish
marriage altogether, why is it urged that it is a
failure ? If not with that aim, why discuss the
institution adversely ?
If it have evils attendant, marriage also brings
out the finer virtues.
History furnishes not only
splendid examples, but the ordinary every-day
experience is full of instances where husbands
have sacrificed lives for wives, wives for husbands,
fathers and mothers for children. Again and
again have splendid cases of devotion, self
abnegation and intense affection in the conjugal
Thousands of in
state presented themselves.
stances are never known to the public, but con
fined to the knowledge of lawyers, physicians and
clergymen, who have chances to see them often.

These alone, if there were no more benefit from

the institution, would suffice to relieve it from the
charge of failure, and stamp it with the approval

of the wise and good.

[Let the writer consult any standard work on the
marriage ceremonies of different countries and the various

32

SKELETON ESSAYS.

histories, for instances of devotion and constancy in the
marriage state, and use the facts in the proper places. ]

On the other hand, those who have failed to
reach happiness in the married state, would have
failed to satisfy themselves in any other relation.
Some are unfit for living in close connection
with those of the opposite sex. With some the
glamour of passion creates ideal expectations
which can not be realised, and invests their com
panion with an imaginary perfection which does
not exist.
Some have not the grace to yield in what after
all are trifles. Others are intensely selfish, or
Some men are brutes,
absurdly domineering.
some women viragos.
To condemn an institution on account of ex
ceptional ills, is unjust ; to propose its abolition,
without anything to take its place, and substitute
lewdness for the sacred domestic relation, is as
wicked as it is absurd.

THE DRAMA)

The general

ITS ORIGIN AND EFFECTS.

impression is that the modern
drama is a Pagan institution, borrowed from
Greece and Rome.
This is an error.
The
Hellenic drama appeared again in Rome, verymuch as the gods of the Greek mythology made
their appearance in the Roman worship, no longer

SKELETON ESSAYS.

33

it

it

;

it,

myths but forms, vulgarised and emasculated.
Zeus was the king of gods and nearly sublime in
his strength and wisdom ; but Jupiter was a
brawler and a ruffian. Hermes was wise as well
as unscrupulous ; but Mercury was a vulgar thief.
Between the awful
tragedies of Euripides,
Aischulos and Sophokles, and the productions of
Marcius, Plautus and Terentius, there is a wide
difference as well as a marked distinction.
We
have nothing of the original spirit. A wax figure
replaces the breathing original. With the de
cline of the Roman empire, what was left of the
ancient drama died out, and made no sign.
It was the church which saw in the drama an
instrument for good, and as the monks used tales
and fables to inculcate certain doctrines, so they
employed the thirst of the populace for amuse
ment as a means to teach religious history, or
enforce moral truths. Hence arose the " morali
ties," and "mystery-plays," from which the present
drama is legitimately derived — plays which
threw aside the old Greek chorus, and let the
play tell its own story, through its situations,
language and action. With the church, instruc
tion was the primary object, and amusement a
means to an end. In the course of time, the
as a thing leading to abuse,
church abandoned
when things too reverenced were represented
and then the laity took
up to furnish amuse
ment solely, and in course of time remoulded

SKELETON ESSAYS.

31

is

it

;

it

;

is

it,

arose
The drama as we now have
entirely.
from this beginning.
It true that the French endeavored to draw
something from the Greek, and insisted on the
preservation of the unities in their plays. But the
English and the Germans paid no attention to
these, nor were the Spaniards, almost as close to
the Romans as the Roumanians, much better.
Their plays became the acted manners and
customs of the time, even when they dealt with
the history of the past. The story of each piece
was one comprehended by the common people
except in the "masques" for the higher classes,
where there was an affectation of the classics
and the characters were drawn boldly from life
around. They appealed to the sentiment, the
sympathy, the prejudices, and, at times, to the
frailties and baser passions of the mass. A study
of the English drama, from the time of Gammer
Gurtoris Needle, down to Bulwer's Richelieu, or
lower down to some of the recent New York or
London "adaptations," will show its steady
culminated in Shakespeare, one
growth until
half of whose plays were his own, and the other
half built upon the works of minor or unknown
writers brought to him as manager and from
that out its decline until
assumed its present
state.
It no longer the drama of the church
which survives alone in the solitary Passion-play
represented occasionally in an obscure German

SKELETON ESSAYS.

35

village, but the amusement of the people, and its
character, be it good or bad, is an evidence of the
tone of morals in the State.
[Here may be introduced something upon the varieties
of dramatic representation, from Punch and the puppet
show, up to the tragedy.]

is

it

it

it,

Whatever be its character, or its kind, no
amount of abuse by the press, nor denunciation
from the pulpit — and the church seems to be the
bitterest foe of its cast off child — is sufficient to
destroy it. In some form or other it is favored by
all civilized peoples. The more candid of its foes
admit that it is not wrong per se, and that there
is no harm in telling a story through acting ; but
they cite all the evils which they aver attend
and insist they are inseparable and inherent,
though
quite certain that they spring from
human defects alone. They insist that the stream
is unclean, and, because those who live on its
banks will cast impurities in the current, instead
of policing
carefully through its entire length,

they endeavor to choke up the fountain.
is

it

The office of the drama.
amuse
Primarily,
ment. People do not go to the theatre as they
would to the church, for instruction in their relig
ious duties, nor as they do to the lecture-room,
to obtain knowledge in literature. Their object
is to relax the tightly-bent bow of intellect, and
to while away a few hours, without harassing
labor of mind or body. The didactic drama

36

SKELETON ESSAYS.

would be an affront as well as a bore. The efforts
of both dramatist and actors are to draw audiences,
and to do this they offer what will attract the
most.
If the subject of the play be base or trivial,
or if the dramatic action be of an immoral nature,
it merely argues a degenerate state of public
morals, or a depraved popular taste.
The effect of the drama upon public manners is
merely to intensify that which already exists.
There are exceptions to this, thus far, that a
drama holding up to ridicule certain peculiarities
may drive them away. A notable instance of
this Is in the case of " The Glance at New York,"
a local dramatic sketch, where Chanfrau gave a
fair picture of the volunteer fireman of his day,
and it had the effect of abolishing the oddities of
speech and manner, of which he made a highly
When any evil apparently
colored picture.
attends or follows a drama, the play is not the
"
cause, but a part of it. It was said that
Jack
"
Sheppard bred burglars in London. As well say
"
that " Oliver Twist
produced a crop of Bill
The radical cure for an
Sykeses or Fagins.
impure drama is to cultivate a more refined taste
in the masses. But that exists in larger amount
Let there be placed on
than pessimists suppose.
the stage, a play, respectable as a work of art,
with a strong plot, exciting situations and welldefined characters, where the story is pure, the
incidents natural and pleasing, and the better

SKELETON ESSAYS

37

feelings of man's nature appealed to, and it will
draw pleased audiences, all the larger if the
moral it teaches be sound, and the superiority of
virtue over vice be rendered apparent. That
there is a stratum of goodness in the basest, and
at least a negative tribute to the right, is shown
by the fact that even the very lowest of the
auditors exhibit a delight at every triumph of
good in the piece, and exhibit a hatred for the
villain which extends to the man who represents
him, whose unpopularity is in exact ratio to the
excellence of his impersonation.
The real reason
why we have so many vicious plays on the stage
is that our dramatists as a rule are copyists, and
either unable or too lazy to invent, draw their
material from the worst European models, giving
us all the filth, without the wit that might relieve
though it would not excuse it.
With all the defects, and despite the evils
which accompany the drama as they do every
human institution, the general effect of the drama
is wholesome, and would be entirely beneficial
could we reform those who witness it.

THE FALSEHOODS

OF HISTORY.

The most troublesome man is the earnest and
conscientious seeker for truth. He disturbs our
preconceived

notions, by exposing errors which

38

SKELETON ESSAYS.

we embraced as facts in our childhood, and have
hugged to our hearts so long that they have be
come friends from whom we are loth to part. In
nothing is the shock so great as in history. We
give up the bogy-man of our infancy without
much regret — rather with pleasure. We dismiss,
at least as much as we can, that belief in ghosts
which made the white moonlight streaming over
We surrender
a clump of laurel bushes a terror.
fairies, goblins, mermaids, ogres and three-headed
giants to the nursery, and smile at the faith the
little folk have in them, as we had in our time.
But to have one's faith in the accuracy of the old
school histories disturbed and even destroyed,
to learn by direct or presumptive evidence that
some of the stories of individual bravery.or tender
ness, or goodness, or villainy that once thrilled us,
were myths at the beginning and falsehoods in the
end, or were untrue ab initio, fills us with anything
but gratitude to the busy inquirer into the facts of
each case. We regard him as a pitiless icono
clast whose hammer has broken our idols, and as
they fall in fragments at our feet, we look upon
the destroyer not as one who relieved us from a
delusion, but as an object of aversion bordering
on horror.
And yet many of our pet bits of history have to
go one by one, and leave no trace.
There is the story of Queen Philippa and the
six burghers of Calais. What a delightful tale it

SKELETON ESSAYS.

39

was, ever fresh in the school reading-books ! The
sturdy and patriotic citizens, giving themselves up
as voluntary sacrifices ; two-legged scape-goats
for the sins of their neighbors ; coming with ropes
around their necks into the presence of the victo
rious and vindictive king, believing they would be
strung up like onions, and yet as calm and selfpossessed as though they were measuring linen
by the ell, or wine by the quart, for their cus
tomers. Then the gentle Philippa, appealing to
her stern lord for clemency, while the tears ran
down her cheeks as big as green peas. To crown
all, the relenting king, as many a better man
since, not daring to refuse the wife of his bosom,
pardoning the half dozen the offences of other
people, and sending back the overjoyed half
dozen to their wives and children, dwellingIn the back-ground
houses, goods and chattels.
stood the brave knights, each iron-clad like a
modern man-of-war, and the proud nobles in
velvet and fur, who, like the captain of His
Majesty's ship, the Thunderbomb, in the ballad of
" Billy Taylor" very much applauded what he
had done. All these, with the aid of modern
research are discovered to be figments, and the
story an interpolation of the record of Sir John
Froissart. Contemporaneous history ignores the
whole thing. There were no burghers in peril ;
and the gentle Philippa, like the mythical Mrs.
Harris, " wasn't no such person," but a high

40

SKELETON ESSAYS.

spirited dame, who loved blood and slaughter,
and led her troops at Neville's Cross, with a
blood-thirsty vim that would have done credit
to any one of the murderers known as heroes to
the world.
William Tell, that expert archer whose arrow
divided the apple on his son's head into two equal
sections, and the arrogant Gessler whom he after
wards pierced but did not divide, with the popular
verdict of " served him right," must these go too ?
It would seem so. The most diligent search fails
to find any Gessler in the Austrian official records,
and Tell himself, with his patriotic companions
are found to be a comparatively modern evolution
from the land of shadows, or rather from the land
peopled by Tom Peppexs, Ferdinand Mendez
Pintos and Major Longbows. It is very hard to
part with Tell. He is interwoven with the litera
ture of a dozen lands, he has been the source of
inspiration to the patriot for many years ; he lives
in plays and operas ; but the iconoclast is relent
less, and down goes our idol as though it were an
image of clay.
Lucrezia Borgia ! We have seen her on the
stage, we have read of her in all the story books ;
she figures in novels many, and tales past count
ing ; and in all these she is the same hideous
monster, incarnation of all vices that could degrade
a female, without a redeeming trait. The modern
writer has been at work in her case, and with a

SKELETON ESSAYS.

41

patience and perseverence that nothing could
Bit by bit, he has removed the stains and
baffle.
blotches placed on her reputation by the calumny
Instead of being the
of contemporary foes.
poisoner and faithless wife, she is found to have
been a much maligned noblewoman, worthy as
the Roman matron whose name she bore, and a
victim to the unscrupulous, the base and the
depraved, to whom her virtues was a continual
reproach.
So the sovereign pontiff, Leo X, was for a long
time systematically blackened ; and his rescue
from an obloquy the most intense was a mere
Mr.
reproduction of the business of Balaam.
Roscoe started to write his life, for the purpose of
fixing the brand upon him more indelibly ; but
as the facts were drawn from the record, the
evidence became too strong for the historian, who
was forced by his own honor and conscience to do
his duty, and the intended libel became a thorough

vindication.
[Consult Roscoe's Leo X, for materials for enlargement

on this topic]

Goldsmith compiled a History of Rome, elegant
in diction as all his work was, but utterly untrust
The old legends of the Eternal City
worthy.
were treated by him as authentic, and the worth
less coin, gilded by his genius, passed current for
a long time. Others followed in his train, and
the English-speaking youth of both hemispheres

SKELETON ESSAYS.

42

had their minds filled with useless lumber. The
developed the
researches of later historians
truth, and before their light, the fratricide of
Romulus, the disinterestedness of Cincinnatus,
the purity of Cato, the Sybil and her books, and
a number of the other cherished traditions fled to
the Limbo of the absurd.
[Use

Arnold's, and

Niebuhr's works on

Rome,

for

instance.]

Richard the Third has been set down as a crookback tyrant, and we picture him as Shakespeare,
to curry favor with the descendant of his successful
foe, made him, and as Kean, Booth, Cooke and
other actors of the intense school played him. We
were a little prepared for this picture to be painted
out, by a passage in the old Baker's Chronicles,
which says — " It is strange that during this wicked
King's reign so many good and useful laws were
made, as though having gained the crown by
pestilent methods, he strove to retain it by wise
and just means." Figs do not grow on thistles,
and vulgar tyrants do not enact excellent laws.
We now know that Richard was but slightly de
formed, that he was a man of marked ability, with
a statesmanship in advance of his time ; that his
claim to the throne under the circumstances of
the case was at least a fair one. It is not quite
clear that the princes were murdered at all, and
it is not quite clear that Perkin Warbeck, so
styled, whom the miserly and mean Henry the

SKELETON ESSAYS.

«

Seventh murdered, was not the son of Edward the

Fourth's wife.
[See Walpole's Historical Doubts,

Richard

and Miss Bacon's

III. ]

But Queen Elizabeth, the "good Queen Bess"
of our school days ; the " Virgin Queen ", the
great and good sovereign, who brought glory to
England only second to that afterwards con
ferred by the Cambro-Briton, whose grandfather
changed his name of Williams to Cromwell, —
must she be dragged from her pedestal, ruff,
farthingale and all ? Alas, for all preconceived
notions, our boundless admiration for the great
" strawberry-blonde" of royalty! The State paper
office has been searched with a relentless hand.
The letters and papers of the time strip off the
peacock's feathers of flattery. Elizabeth is shown
to be almost all that Lucrezia Borgia was said to
be, and in some respects worse, weak, vain,
petulant, cruel and with but poor knowledge of
statecraft — one who has obtained credit for
brains under false pretences ; a painted and
wicked harridan, without honor, truth, pity or
remorse.
[Examine Froude's History of England from the Fall
of Wolsey to the death of Elizabeth, for numerous illus
trations.]

Our own history, both of the Federal Union,
and the States, brief as it is, contains many false
hoods, that are continually being exposed. It is

44

SKELETON ESSAYS.

painful to see this, and to note how our most
admired heroes have been stripped of much of
the glory given them by friends, and some of the
objects of our early hatred relieved of a portion
of the odium cast upon them by partisan foes. In
the case of Washington whom Weems and even
others of more repute, invested with the attributes
of a demi-god, and coupled his name with absurd
and ridiculous anecdotes, this research has been
serviceable, whether meant kindly or unkindly.
It has let in a flood of light in his real character,
and shown us not a myth, but a man whose
natural faults of temper were held in check in
general by a masterful self-control, and whose
defective early education was supplemented by
the training of experience, and by the gradual
Before
formation of a well-balanced judgment.
his history Was fairly investigated by the daring
iconoclast, we stared at his figure with open-eyed
wonder, and doubts as to its reality ; but after
wards, when the hammer fell without more than
chipping off the crust, we learned to regard the
Father of his Country with an esteem that
approaches veneration.
But in the interests of truth it is well that the
History is at
seeker after it should be diligent.
best the collation of imperfect evidence. No two
men out of a dozen, viewing the same occurrence,
will agree as to details ; and it is only by com
paring their several accounts that we can arrive

SKELETON ESSAYS.

45

at a just conclusion.
But the test of probability
and possibility is sometimes crucial.

THE COMPENSATION OF LABOR.

Adam Smith, one of the most remarkable men
of his time, or of any time, holds that the proper
compensation of labor is the value of the thing
wrought, and the thing wrought would thus be

the proper compensation.
If the material were
found on no man's land, and were no man's prop
erty, the position would be right enough. But
when the material is that of another, when the
labor comes through the favor of another, when
there is capital, which is labor crystallized, in
volved; when beside the manual labor, there comes
in supervision, which is a species of labor, the ques
tion is less simple, and the answer not so correct.
When a laborer works at the bidding of another,
his compensation is known as wages. He ex
changes his labor not directly for necessaries or
luxuries, but for the means by which he may
obtain these. And the amount of these wages
earned is regulated, if justly regulated, by the
demand for the labor. If more of the results of
labor be required than can be produced, then the
employer needs the services of the laborer much
When there is
and the latter can dictate terms.
over production, then the case is reversed, and

S

46

SKELETON ESSAYS.

the employer, aided by the need of the laborer,
It is the inevitable law of
makes his own terms.
demand and supply. When we talk of over pro
duction, it refers not to the general product of
industry, but to certain parts. When we say that
our working population are not properly com
pensated for their labor, we mean the greater
portion, and not the whole. For while in some
things we have, or may have, a production beyond
the capacity of consumption, in other things it is
the other way ; and while the great mass of our
laborers may not receive enough wages to pro
vide for the wants of themselves and dependents,
there are those who have a considerable surplus,
or would have, if they were ordinarily prudent
[Here to consider the extravagance of the laborer com
pared with his grandfather in the same condition. But is
it extravagance ? The invention of machinery, by cheapen
ing the price of what were formerly luxuries, has made
them necessaries by habit
Consult general or local
American histories, almost any of them, and see that the
lack of what are now common comforts arose not from
thrift, but because they were out of the reach of the toiler.]

That we have less distress here than in Europe
is because of so much unoccupied territory, and

the reducing of more ground to cultivation, and
consequent building up of villages, towns and
cities. Then the elasticity of action in our work

ing people helps them. In many parts of the old
world if a man be bred to a particular calling, he

SKELETON ESSAYS.

47

himself unfitted for another, and, denied
employment, falls back on what manual or servile
labor he can pick up, or on charity, or theft.
Here the motto is — " it is handy to be shifty in a
new country ". This retards a little the lowering
thinks

-

of the compensation

of labor.

Over production affects disastrously the price
of labor. With the self reliance of a century since,
our people could easily restore the balance in
The growth of the
case of over production.
country has made a change. There seems to be
less self reliance. People are beginning to depend
more on government than on themselves. Politi
cal action, in both parties, is at variance with the
We expect to have
design of our government.
labor regulated by law, compensation arbitrarily
adjusted, and the industrious to support the idle.
Division of labor.
Trades are divided into
specialties. Much of it done by machinery. This
requires less skill, and tends to reduce compensa
tion.
Examine the
[Instance the planing-machine, eta
United States census for the last three decades, to show
the growth of diversity of occupation, the splitting up of
trades, the increase of special and decrease of general skill,

This
mercy of employers.
point to be elaborated, not losing sight of the fact that
placing

workmen

at

the

machinery, and division of labor, cheapens the cost of
many things that would not otherwise be within reach of
the

poor.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

48

Concentration of capital in fewer hands another
disturbing factor in fixing the compensation of
labor. The smaller employers are giving way to
the larger. This can not be avoided, being a
necessary accompaniment of the large growth of
a country.
But it leads to a serious evil. The
combination of one side to lessen compensation
causes the combination of the other to increase it.
If the fight were between millionaries the poor
might look on quietly. But when the employer
with a million dollars crushes out the employer
with ten thousand, the employed suffer. They
suffer not only in wages, but through combina
tions that follow, in increased cost of necessaries.
[Consult the U. S. census, and the Reports of the U. S.
Bureau of Statistics. Take any article in common use, with
the number of consumers.

Sugar for instance.

An in

crease of half a cent per pound in cost, may mean only

apiece to families. The
Pursue this in
aggregate will be an enormous amount.
Then calculate the effect
vestigation with other articles.

an

of

average

a

loss of fifty cents

slight reduction in the wages earned.]

That depends
The proper amount of wages.
The
upon the requirements of the individual.
increase of population, and the increase of wealth
In a new country,
increase these requirements.
to build the log-cabin or the adobe hut costs little
money directly ; the food is simple and mainly to
be had for the taking ; the quality of clothing" a
As population becomes
matter of indifference.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

49

properly increase. Then there are
Man and wife, and
prospective requirements.
the two children to replace both, are not alone to
Needs
be taken care of, but any surplus children.
of sickness or wants of old age to be considered.
The alms-house a reproach to civilization, and
denser, wants

the hospital, though necessary in accidents, other
wise an evidence of concentration of capital in
fewer hands, and of the decay of self-reliance.
avoid both labor needs fair compensation.

To

What is a fair rate ?
The amount paid for
labor should leave a surplus over provisions for
immediate wants, sufficient to permit the thrifty
"to lay up for a rainy day", and this without
abridging reasonable comforts, good food, suitable
clothing, complete shelter, and a few hours for
mental cultivation, and that amusement which
will restore the physical waste of toil.
[Read Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations; Edward
Atkinson's papers on politico-economical subjects in the
Forum, and consult the United States Consular Reports,
for a number of miscellaneous facts in support of points.]

THE CREDIT SYSTEM.
FAVORABLE VIEW.
Necessity of capital. In all enterprises of civil
ized society, money as a medium of exchange,
for compensation of labor, or for purchase of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

60

is

;

is

is

is

it,

material, is needful. When men organize sover
eign political communities, exchange of individual
labor, or of one product for another, practically
ceases. Money is introduced as the representative
of value. If the man have it he only requires
skill in its management, to make his industry or
If he have it not, he must
his skill valuable.
borrow, or get his creditor to wait until he earns
a necessary
to defray his debt. Credit then
capital.
agent of individual enterprise, for credit
Beginning at top. The government would have
its operations impeded, or entirely stopped, but
for credits. The capital of the government
the
contributions of the citizens, or subjects, of their
and these are levied according to the
taxes
amount of protection, that of life and the person
being demanded equally, and that of property in
ratio of the amount requiring protection held by
the individual. But the collection of taxes, how
slow. Hence the State resorts to
ever sure,
credit, and either defers its payment to certain set
times, or borrows in advance of collections, from
those who have accumulated the product of labor,
and who permit the use of their money for a
Thus the wheels of
stipulated compensation.
government go on without cessation.
Individuals subjected to the same rules. A man
embarking in business, and finding that his earn
ings will enable him to more than pay certain
obligations, borrows on the faith of that, and goes

SKELETON ESSAYS.
on.

51

Without credit, he would frequently have to

pause, and remain in idleness.
mainly arises from his reputation

As his credit

for honesty,
industry and judgment, his creditor extends
The credit given to him, is given by
indulgence.
him in a less degree to others, and this credit
extending over the community is an endless one
which keeps everything in motion.
This due to
[Meet the objection of frequent failures.
In such a case
lack of judgment, misfortune or intent.
the fault lies with the creditor in not looking more
closely to the character of his debtor. Urge that it is a
small fault compared to the advantage of a system which
allows

the stream

of production to

flow

on without

serious check.

Cite evidence of the beneficial use of credits.
The
building and loan association may be brought forward ;
this is practically an institution of credit for a large
amount, based on the stated payment of small sums.

A

He has accumulated less than a
On that, and the pay
quarter of the amount of the cost.
ment weekly cr monthly of a small part of his earnings,
joining with others, some in like condition, he borrows
The
from the accumulated fund enough for his need.
interest of the loan, and the weekly or monthly payments,
man desires a house.

amount to little more than the rent he would have had to
The amount paid for rent, which
pay to another.
frequently amounts to 10 per cent on cost, may be given
with the amount paid under this form of credit The
instance of the growth of business in the retail trade by
judicious use of credit may be enlarged upon.]

6a

SKELETON ESSAYS.

Without credit, the honest, poor man would be
crushed entirely at the first stroke of sickness or
accident ; with credit he tides over that, or tem
porary loss of work, until with returning health
or renewed employment, he is enabled to dis
charge the obligations.
Great enterprises, which add to the wealth of
the State and the public prosperity, and give
employment to thousands, are started and main
tained by the credit system. It unlocks capital
and sets it in motion, increasing the general
wealth, and developing the resources of the
country. Without credit there would be stagna
tion in business, and the general growth would
be slow and uncertain.

THE CREDIT SYSTEM.
ADVERSE VIEW.
Difference between real and sham prosperity.
One is actual earning ; the other is assumed.
Capital is the result of an accumulation of the
Credit is based on the mere
profits of industry.
anticipation of profits that may or may not come.

It

The evils of credit are numerous and endless.

encourages extravagance, and discourages
"
thrift. Were the rule " Pay as you go rigidly
enforced, men would rarely buy more than the
necessity of the moment demanded, and never

SKELETON ESSAYS.

63

go beyond their means. The fatal facility of
obtaining anything that strikes the fancy in the
present, with payment deferred to the future,
encourages unneeded buying, and involves the
curse of debt. A man, under the credit system,
however honest his intention, is frequently made
the instrument of injustice to others and to him
self. He often becomes branded as a rogue, when
he is merely the victim of a false system.
The instalment system, as it is called, is the
A young couple
bane of the younger poor.
marry, and propose to furnish their house or
apartments ; with cash in hand they buy to the
limit of their means, for actual needs. Under the
instalment plan, they buy prettier and costlier
furniture, to pay ,for it in small sums weekly.
They buy .more than they need, and pay more
than they should. Sickness or lack of work may
follow—and then ?
[The consequences in such
one, may be here enumerated.]

a

case, a very common

The pass-book system is another evil. A young
wife, having an industrious husband, readily ob
tains weekly credit at the grocer's store. Some
of such debts are not paid, and an additional per
centage is put on the price to others, to make up
the loss. Then the facility of "just putting it
"
inclines the thoughtless to
down in the book
unnecessary purchases. A week may come when
there is no earning. The credit stops when most

SKELETON ESSAYS.

54

or goes on until the amount
beyond the means of the debtor.
needed,

passes

[The tailor, the butcher, the baker — debts to these may

be considered as part of the subject.]

With cash in hand the buyer can go to any

.

store he chooses, and the cash store is always
the cheapest. The management of a small stock
of money in hand, fortifies prudence and
strengthens judgment.
The creditor gives credit thinking the law will
protect him. To the man who desires to evade
payment the law has no terror. He provides for
it beforehand. To the honest debtor it is a harass
ment.
It reduces the creditors' chances ; for he
can not obtain his debt if the debtor have neither
money nor goods ; and the suit, by taking the
time and worrying the mind of the party sued,
reduces his ability to pay.
A law preventing collection by the courts of
all debts incurred after a prescribed date, would
force cash dealings, abolish the immense amount
of fees paid to crafty lawyers, sheriffs and clerks,
and prevent half of the misery in the world.
[An examination into the record of the

nearest court,

showing the suits brought, costs paid, what amount
recovered and what not, would fortify this last point.
The "autobiography of Franklin," and "Poor Richard's
"
Almanac would afford valuable hints.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

65

FOOD, ITS NATURE AND OBJECTS.

Food is needed to repair the continual waste of
animal tissue. That fact is self-evident. Nature
provides the sensation of hunger, which may be
natural or unnatural.
The question first to be
considered is "what kind of food?" And to

determine this we must ascertain : —
i. What elements are wasted, or thrown off
from the system. These are principally, carbon,
oxygen and nitrogen, and certain mineral salts.

[If

not sufficiently informed, or to refresh memory,
consult Bloxam's "Chemistry," and give a brief but
clear description of each element, its nature and the
proportion in which it exists in the human body.]

The proportions in which these constituents
are found in the leading articles of food.
2.

Very
[Consult Pavy, on "Food and Dietetics."
trustworthy analysis of various fruits, vegetables and
cereals may be found in the U. S. Agricultural reports,
most of which are easily accessible.]
3.

The nature and action of the digestive pro

cess, with the agents at work during digestion
and assimilation.
[Consult

Draper's, or any other modern work on
"
and Bennett on " Nutrition — especially

" Physiology, "
the latter.

]

Condition of the system at the time of eating.
This does not refer to cases of sickness, when the
4.

56

SKELETON ESSAYS.

nature and quantity of food must be left to the
judgment of the physician.
Some
5. The peculiar nature of the individual.
persons thrive under food which is injurious to
others. This is often because of variance in the
strength of digestive powers ; but not unfrequently
from the idiosyncrasy of parties. One man will
bolt an entire lobster, and sleep the sleep of the
just thereafter ; a small fragment of the same
crustacean will produce alarming symptoms in
another. No assignable cause for this difference.
A rooted distaste to anything a good reason for
rejecting it. The craving for any particular kind
of food, unless it be of a noxious nature, or no
food at all, to be equally respected. When a child
has a craving for green apples, that is the desire
of ignorance ; where it has one for clay or slate
pencil dust, this is morbid, and the symptom of
an internal disorder.
The next thing to be considered is the special ef
fect of food, not so much in the replacement of loss,
as for the kind of loss it replaces, and the partic
ular part of the system it is calculated to restore.
For this purpose articles of food may be classified :
1. Flesh-formers ; those articles containing a
large amount of nitrogen. Lean meat, beans and
cheese are instances.
Many people labor under
the error that the main business of food is to pro
duce flesh, and insist on the necessity of a nitro
genous diet, mainly, if not exclusively.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

57

These contain carbon,
Heat-producers.
mainly, with oxygen and hydrogen, or an excess
of these. Maize is one of the latter. They are
2.

also fat formers.

These are cereals
Bone-makers.
rich in the phosphates.
4. Nerve-nourishers, or stimulants.
Nearly all articles of food combine two
of these offices. A judicious mixture of
of diet is such that all the claims of the
for reproduction shall be satisfied.
3.

mainly,

or more

articles
system

[Consult Bennett and Pavy, as before, with Ainstie on
"Stimulants," and Edward Smith, on "Foods."]
1. That meat is the most
Popular errors.
nourishing food. Not even as regards nitrogen,
for an examination of milk, eggs, cheese, etc.,
show that these fulfil the purpose quite as well.
2. That persons should take exercise after a
full meal. Better let an interval elapse.

3.

no.

That late suppers are injurious.

As

a rule,

Late gorging is injurious, and early gorging

also.
4. That stimulants just before meal aid diges
tion. Not at all. They provoke a flow of gastric
juice, and increase appetite. They do less mis
chief at a meal than when taken on an empty
stomach, and that is all there is of it, "Taken at
the close of a meal, if not of a too fiery nature,
they aid digestion ; but where the digestive
powers are normal, are not required.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

68

5.

That stimulation is followed by depression.

Not so.

If depression

follow, it is because

the

stimulation has been pushed to narcotism. A
man who takes enough wine at night to make
him talkative and lively, will be apt to feel a
headache and other depressing symptoms next
morning. He will tell you that he was sober the
night before, and knew perfectly well what he
was a"bout ; but that he is suffering from a reac
tion after stimulation.
Not a bit of it. He was
in the first stage of narcosis, or in other words
the first stage of intoxication.
6. That Sating at any but regular and specified
hours, is injurious.
This is a pernicious error.
It is well to eat at regular hours, if you have an
appetite, but not to force it Eat between meals,
if you feel hungry. Eat —which means to masti
cate your food, and not bolt it whole.
[An examination of the processes of mastication, deg

lutition, digestion and assimilation in any standard
work on physiology or dietetics will give you proper
views on all these points.]

THE EVIL OF DRUNKENNESS.

PROHIBITION VIEW.

The evils flowing from drunkenness require no
demonstration.
They exist too prominently and
too certainly to admit of doubt. For the purpose

SKELETON ESSAYS.

69

of consideration they may be divided into those
affecting the individual and society.
The evils to the individual are : —
i. An impaired constitution. Drunkenness is the
result of over-stimulation of the brain and spinal
marrow through excessive use of alcoholic drinks.
Over-stimulation causes abnormal action, and
this continued, disorders and at last diseases the
Other parts share in the
parts over-stimulated.
disorder by sympathy.
Varying somewhat by the
2. Specific Diseases.
circumstances of intoxication, but mainly through
the nature of the particular alcoholic drink in
dulged in. Thus from beer we have accumulation
of fat on the viscera, hyperemia, resulting in
apoplexy, enlargement of the liver, chronic des
quamative nephritis (Bright's disease) and other
ailments ; from brandy, liver diseases ; from ex
cessive whiskey-drinking, or its sudden cessation,
delirium tremens ; from gin, kidney disease and
anemia ; while where there is a gouty diathesis,
whether inherited or not, wine or beer develop
gout readily. But the main trouble is the liability
to disease which habitual drinking brings.
The brain is the organ
3. Moral degradation.
through which all mental action is carried on. To
properly perform its functions it requires to be
If kept
kept in a sound and natural condition.
in an unnatural state of excitement, the apparent
result is the loss of mental vigor, and decay of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

60

the moral faculties. We say " apparent." The
mind itself being immaterial is not subject to
material change but the medium through which
it acts suffers. This may be illustrated by the
effect of different media on vision.
Through the
air or the plane glass, things are of one size, to
the eye.
Using a concave lens, they seem
smaller ; with a convex lens, they are magnified.
The eye is sound in each case, but the medium is
different. So with the mind, as manifested by the
aid of a sound or unsound brain.
Hence the
moral degradation and mental weakness that
follow undue stimulation of the brain.

"
[Consult MacNish on Drunkenness
current works on this subject. ]

"

and

other

3.

is

it,

The evils to society are: —
By frequent
to communities.
1. Demoralization
violation of order, and growing disregard of law.
The basis for, and cause of the latter, the evasion
or defiance of laws made for the regulation of the
liquor traffic. The cause of the former mainly
drunkenness itself.
Drunkenness, and the lack of
2. Pauperism.
thrift accompanying
ends in an increase of
the number maintained at the public expense.
This proven by personal observation, as well as
through queries addressed to officials of alms
houses and hospitals, and to those having charge
of out-door relief to the poor.
Increase of crime.
A large proportion of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

61

notably all crimes of violence, can be
directly or indirectly traced to the abuse of alco
crime,

holic stimulants.
Certain crimes require sober
criminals ; but these are few in number, and the
lack of moral sense they show has been often
increased by associations involving drunkenness.
4.

Physical degeneracy of the race. The children

of drunkards not only inherit the tendency to the
drink-habit, but have less stamina than those of
sober parents.

" Alcohol : its use and abuse," one of the
[Examine
Appleton's Health Primers.]

The moderate use of stimulants, so long as
moderate, may not produce evil, but the danger
lies in the fact that the bounds of moderation are

so easily overstepped, and that it is likely to result
in a habit requiring increasing amounts in time.
Experience has shown that there is less injury
to the system in an occasional drunken fit, than in
drinking a regular daily amount within limits of
sobriety. In the first case the system reacts, in the
second it has no chance. Alcoholic stimulants are
not needed in temperate or warm climates, as they
are generators of heat in the system, and in cold
climates, fatty food is better than whiskey. Even
in moderation alcoholic drinks are not required
by persons of a nervous temperament, and the
stimulus required at times by the bilious or lym
phatic, may be readily found in tea, coffee, or
other stimulants which feed the nerves without

62

SKELETON ESSAYS.

first touching the brain. As the beneficial use of
alcoholic drink in a state of health is, at the very
best, doubtful ; as in a state of sickness, they
should be administered under the direction of the
physician ; as moderation in their use so fre
quently passes into excess ; as the consequences
of excess are so ruinous to man and society, it
becomes the duty of the State to prevent their
'
use.
The only mode to do that is an absolute
prohibition of the manufacture and sale of fer
mented and distilled liquors, enforced with vigor.
•

"
[See MacNish on Drunkenness," and the publications
generally of the American Temperance Society, for
materials to expand this essay to any desirable length. ]

THE EVILS OF DRUNKENNESS.
ANTI-PROHIBITION

VIEW.

The evils resulting from the abuse of alcoholic
drinks admitted, and enlarged upon, with cita
tions from the record to show what violations of
law, order and propriety come from drunkenness.
The real problem to solve is not the evil of the
vice, but the means to prevent or to modify it.
Of these, two are mainly suggested:
I. Moral suasion. To teach the child, from the
beginning, the real nature of alcoholic drinks,
and their effects in small and large amounts on
the human body.
This teaching must be exact.

SKELETON ESSAYS.
To misstate, or

63

even through excess of zeal to

exaggerate, does mischief, for as the child dis
covers the untruth in after years, there is an in
evitable reaction. The difference in effect of each
kind of fermented and distilled drink upon the
system, should be truthfully taught ; the disorders
and disease resulting from the abuse of such
drinks ; their evil results to a community ; their
rare necessity as medicine ; and the reasons why
they are sometimes craved, should be added.
Along with this treatment of the sober, from
childhopd «p, the drunkard to be punished as an
offender, and not petted and pitied as a victim.
Even the man who becomes intoxicated upon a
social occasion to be frowned on, and if it occur
In short, respect
again "sent to Coventry".
sobriety, and treat drunkenness as you would any
other social misdemeanor.
2.

By force of Law.

To vigorously prohibit,

either by general law, or through a local vote,
the manufacture and sale of all kinds of alcoholic
drinks.
The moral remedy is the only one of value.
The legal one is incapable of enforcement unless

'it be supported by

a sentiment generated by the

first, when it is useless. It is urged, in the face of
this, that the evil, being so great, can only be
suppressed by force.

Proliibition of two sorts.
I. Local, by special law enabling

a community

20i><>

64

SKELETON ESSAYS.

to determine by vote whether the sale of alcoholic
liquors shall be prohibited or tolerated within a
This is known as
given political boundary.
"local option."
Local option is immoral in principle, and a
failure in practice.
Immoral in principle. The right of the indi
vidual to eat, drink or dress as he chooses is
inherent, and in a state of nature absolute. But
it may be limited or checked by the supreme
power of the State, when the individual is part of
the community, provided, its exercise^ in a par
ticular direction be productive of such paramount
evils that nothing but the absolute prohibition of
No sensiBle person
its use can prevent these.
pretends that alcoholic drinks are poisonous in
moderate amounts. But if their abuse can only
be prevented by prohibition, then the right to
prevent their use by forbidding their sale seems
clear. But when the power arises from such a
cause, the right becomes a duty. The legislature
can not, without committing a crime, authorise
the mere majority in a community to inflict upon
the rest an evil which it became the duty of the
State to prohibit.
Local option is wicked in
principle, as well as a dereliction of duty by the
legislature.
Ineffectual in action. The prohibition is within
certain limits, and does not prevent any citizen
residing within the specified space, from stepping

SKELETON ESSAYS.

65

over the boundary, and gratifying his appetite
It prevents, to be sure, open liquor stores
there.

within the municipality, but generates illicit trade,
without any restraint or government by law.
Absurd in application. To sell in the com
munity where the vote is adverse, is a misde
meanor, an offence mala prohibita, and therefore
an offence against morals. In the adjoining com
munity where the vote is favorable, the business
is legalised, and the sale violates no law.
Thus
a question of morals as well as manners is de
termined by vote, and may be by the vote of one
individual pro or con, an absurdity which is mani
fest.

General and absolute, by fundamental or by
statute law, prohibiting both the manufacture and
sale within the jurisdiction of the State.
Practice has proven this to be useless as a
preventive measure, and injurious in its effects.
It has been tried in Maine, New Hampshire and
Vermont, for over a generation ; tried in some
States for a shorter period, tried in others again
and again, and abandoned.
Useless, because the concurrent evidence of
statistics, observation carefully made, and results
2.

show that it has persistently failed

injurious,
because under it pauperism has increased, and
arrests for drunkenness have steadily increased.
;

[Consult the U. S. census for i860, 1870 and 1880,
showing a greater amount of pauperism in Maine, New

SKELETON ESSAYS.

66

Hampshire and Vermont than in any other States, and
its steady growth at every decade ; the increase being
least in New Hampshire, where the law is more loosely
enforced.
See Dr. English's Des Moines Lecture, with
its citations.
Consult the records of the police arrests
in the various towns and cities in the prohibition States,
and the official reports made to the Massachusetts
Legislature, in the Twelfth Annual Report of the State
Bureau of Statistics.

Is high

license the means

of solving the prob

lem?
Scarcely, without a thorough education of
the masses on the subject. In some places it
seems to have led to results which give it popular
But a comparison between the number
favor.

by the local authorities in
these cases, and those of the United States In
ternal Revenue Commissioners, show that a
number of illicit drinking places exist under
though not as many as under prohibition.
The only remedy seems to be the general in
struction of the public as to the effects of the use
of alcoholic drinks (that of the abuse being wellknown), not the assumptions of fanatics, but the
truth. With this the prompt and sure punishment
of the drunkard should be coupled. Mere bold
statements that the average man feels to be un
true, added to a slobbering sympathy for the
In this way the
habitual drunkard, will not do.

it,

of licenses granted

demand may be diminished, or perhaps stopped.
Gut off demand and supply will cease.
So long

SKELETON ESSAYS.

67

demand exists, supply will be profitable, and
prohibitory laws absurd failures.

as

WORRY.

Worry, fretting over mishaps of our own or the
failings of our neighbors, leading to anxiety and
melancholy in one case, and fussiness and med
dling in the other, is the characteristic of this
It does not exist to the same extent
country.
abroad. There, when it appears, it comes through
real cause ; here, it is often without cause, espec
ially when it leads to meddling with the affairs of
Abroad, the effect of the worry of the
others.
individual, takes the shape of socialism, or an
archy, because of the woes and troubles of the
The poor blinded Samson of the people
masses.
tries to shake down the pillars of his prison house,
and involve himself and his foes in a common
ruin. Here, where there is less, though at times
something, to complain of, the worry over the
troubles of others arises from uneasiness, and
takes the shape of societies to make every one
better except those who are engaged in the
benevolent work.
[At this point an amusing account of the various socalled

and philanthropic societies may be
given, with the cost of their action, and the probable net
benevolent

result of their operation ; or any one of them may be
taken as a type of the rest.]

68

SKELETON ESSAYS.
This form of worry arises mainly from the lack

of sources of amusement. A stone hunter, a col
lector of insects, even the one engaged in that
mildest of fun, hunting odd postage stamps, rarely
goes into the worry of a society for supplying the
destitute natives of the North Pole with ice cream.
Necessity made us utilitarian at the beginning on
this side of the water ; we were kept hard at work.

As we gained more leisure, and necessity pressed
less, we needed something to employ the newly-

gained idle moments, and our natural kindness of
heart led us to endeavor to make our neighbor
better than ourself, whether he would or not.
And we inspect our dear neighbor's dinner-pot,
drink-bowl and clothes, — care much for the
bettering of his conduct by our standard, — attack
such errors of society as we have no desire to
commit, and meddle with everybody's affairs but
our own, because we have no other way of em
ploying spare time. Over the troubles of those
who do not know they are troubled, we worry
ourselves into leanness, dyspepsia, jaundice and
premature graves.
Simply
Why is there less of this abroad ?
because there is abundance of amusement pro
vided. The more despotic the government the
more need that the powers that be should keep
Down South, in
the people in a pleasant humor.
the ante-bellum times, the slaves had their cornshuckings, their coon-hunting, their hoe-downs,

SKELETON ESSAYS.

69

their banjo, and their Christmas festivities. Now
Sambo is not furnished with these to the same
extent, and he is filled with a spirit of meddling,
and of marring where he cannot meddle.
His
white "man and a brother" at the North is in the
same position.
Amusement in France. There is enough of it.
Gobbling a draught of light wine (chiefly water,
with a light suspicion of alcohol), rustic fetes, or
what passes for rusticity, and he worries little
over his troubles. It is only in Paris or the larger
cities where they worry, and that chiefly with
Bread and
government, not with private affairs.
butter may come or not, but the Frenchman is
toujours gai. His very sorrows have a mock ap
pearance. Their exaggeration is on the outside.
They trouble themselves very little about the
manners of their neighbors, and never about their
morals. As it is known here, worry does not
trouble the Frenchman.
Amusements in Germany. The German has his
outdoor frolic, with his family around him, an
unlimited quantity of beer, his waltz, his concerts,
With all these
his commerz, and his friendships.
he has no room for worry. If he have speculative
theories, as to reconstruction of society, he rarely
— unless under the pressure of personal want, —
attempts to put them in practice. He throws off
his care as much as possible but does not attempt
to nurse it ; he would not know how to do it.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

70

Amusement in Italy.
The ordinary Italian
never worries about himself at all. His notion of
life is dolce far niente, the sweet doing nothing.
Certainly nothing looks to be more miserable ihan
the lives of the lazzaroni, or even those of the
honest hard working peasants.
A melon and a
crust, or a dish of macaroni, with a flask of cheap
wine make a meal ; rags are picturesque, and
sufficient to cover ; sleep out of doors in a genial
climate ensures pure air. Why should the Italian

worry

?

Coarser as becomes
Amusement in England.
the race and the climate, partaking of the brutality
of the one, and the sluggishness of the other.

Dog-fighting, prize-fighting, (both going out)
climbing the greased pole, cricket, going for a day
out and coming home drunk — amusement such as
it is. But in spite of these, and the concert halls,
the common Englishman is beginning to imitate
his kin on this side of the water, in adopting
worry, and is thereby losing temper and flesh.
Amusements in America only exist in the shape
of toil. Just now there is base-ball in the ascend
ant, but that involves the greatest labor, intensifies
worry, and has become of late a mere gambling

device. In and about cities the main amusement
is what is called a picnic, a mere drinking excur
sion or worse, sowing the seed of worry broad
cast, with a sure crop. Even devotion degenerates
into worry. The American smile is a sardonic

SKELETON ESSAYS.

71

the American laugh a yell ; the habitual
expression on the American face the contortion
from a perpetual toothache.
America produces
cotton, wheat and tobacco for the world ; she
grows a crop of worry for domestic consumption.

grin

;

SHALL WE HANG MURDERERS? YES.

A life for

a life.

The earliest and most persis

tent impulse of man.

An instinct in the

savage

state, modified into the decency of judicial form
by civilization. Originally it was through a feel
ing of revenge, based upon justice ; but society has
changed this, and converted it into a penalty.
The object is to deter future as well as to punish
present offenders, and to commit to the hands of
the State what otherwise would be unregulated

personal vengeance.
[Consult various books of travels for the customs of
other nations in this matter, contrast their punishments
with our own, more especially the rough and brutal ex
ecutions of barbarous nations with those of more civil
ized peoples.]

it,

The practice sanctioned by Holy Writ, as well as
custom. '" Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed." A human life sacred
from individual violence, and the life of him who
the property of the community
wantonly takes

72

SKELETON ESSAYS.

whose statutes, as well as natural law, he has
infringed.
Modes of death considered.
The sword, and its
modification the guillotine, and the rope.
Objections, the brutality engen
Decapitation.
dered in the mind of the spectator by the sight of
blood, and the doubt whether consciousness does
not remain long enough to inflict exquisite mental
and physical torture.
Hanging a perferable mode. In its favor : —
Haman, in the book of
1. Its
antiquity.
Esther, and other instances.
This is more feared than the
2. Its disgrace.
mere matter of death, and therefore adds power
to deter to the penalty.
In taking life
3. Its comparative humanity.
through the decree of the law, and in accordance
with justice, we have no right to torture or to
So far as the
Hanging does neither.
mangle.
evidence of those who have been resuscitated
after strangulation shows, the death is somewhat
like that of drowning, and comparatively painless.
By the modern mode, however, even strangulation
is avoided, and death becomes instantaneous by
displacement of the vertebrae, any subsequent
motion being spasmodic nervous contraction, with
the victim unconscious.
Objections to the death-penalty arise principally
But the necessity of the
from morbid sensibility.
case should overcome this, which interposes itself

SKELETON ESSAYS.

73

on behalf of a criminal.

The public safety superior
When conviction is had, the

to such a feeling.
execution of the sentence should be certain.
Objection that the criminal is rarely in a fit
condition for death, absurd. His victim had less
chance for preparation.
If he can not be made
ready, if the awful doom before him does not
engender repentance, he is not fit to be a member
of the community.
Neither consideration effects
the question.
The law does not punish homicide in the heat
of passion with death. The act does not involve
total depravity. There is more or less provocation,
creating a sudden deadly impulse, which is grati
fied before the passion has time to cool, and
reason to recover its balance. But the cool and
deliberate murderer, who with malice afore
thought takes the life of a fellow-being, demands
death as a penalty necessary for the safety of the
citizen, and as an atonement to the outraged
dignity of the State.
"
[See Cheever on Capital Punishment," Beccari's Crimes
and Punishments.]

SHALL WE HANG

MURDERERS?

NO.

The object of punishment is not merely to in
flict a penalty for crime in the past, but to deter
from its commission in the future. The record
shows that the average of deliberate murderers

74

SKELETON ESSAYS.

.

in proportion to population is rather on the in
crease.
The death penalty evidently does not
The causes of the failure are not far to
deter.
seek.
Mainly it is because of the uncertainty of
its infliction, and while that uncertainty is partly
in the nature of the criminal, it is mainly because
of the nature of the punishment itself.

Thus —
:

i. Not one deliberate murderer in a hundred
expects discovery ; or if he do it openly, as a
rule provides himself with an excuse
which he thinks will serve his purpose, or he con
templates following the act by suicide. Where it
is by lying in wait, or by poison, his method is
general

secret, and the secret he believes to be impene
trable. The death penalty does not deter him.
2. Detected, he does not usually anticipate
conviction.
The evidence in such a case, unlike
that in passionate homicide, is presumptive.
He
relies upon lacking facts in the chain of circum
stances, of conflicting presumptions, and on a
He also relies somewhat
plausible hypothesis.
on the sympathy with a man in jeopardy of life,
and the repulsion in the mind of the average
juror to finding a verdict that will hang a man,

if a loophole of escape

offer.

Convicted, he relies upon the law's delays, a
possible new trial, and failing these, upon ex
3.

ecutive clemency.
[Instances may be cited from various cases, some

of

SKELETON ESSAYS.
them
a

75

recent, where even after conviction and sentence,

new trial

loss

-

resulted in acquittal, through

of evidence.

intermediate

These are easily accessible.]

Nor does the actual fact of execution deter
much.
Almost every execution is followed by a
crop of murders. The assassin becomes a hero,
to be imitated by the depraved, especially if he
die game, as he generally does. In nine cases
out often, he becomes a saint, expresses a con
fidence in ascending straight to heaven, where he
will not meet the victim whom he sent to perdi
tion with all his sins on his head. A few days,
and the punishment and the crime are alike
forgotten.
Outside of the barbarity of an execution, when
it does take place, the objection lies to the uncer
tainty that it will take place at all. Punishment
for a crime should be made speedy and certain.
imprisonment for life, with no hope of pardon,
were substituted, there would be less difficulty in
obtaining convictions, and the false pity of the
public would not be aroused to baffle justice. A
life imprisonment, made absolute, is terrible. It
is the burial of a man alive. It may be cruel to
him, but it does not tend to brutalize the public.
The State has no right to punish an innocent
man, nor to tolerate any system under which an
innocent man may be judicially murdered ; nor is it
expedient to continue anything which, by the ex
citement of morbid sympathy, may suffer the

If

SKELETON ESSAYS.

76

guilty to escape.

There are quite

a number

of

instances on record where men have been con
victed and executed under a strong prescription
of guilt, and their innocence discovered when too
late.
To prevent this it is not necessary that
murderers should go unpunished ; but that the
punishment be of such a nature that reparation
can be made for a judicial error.
The blame in these cases has been laid upon
presumptive or, as it is vulgarly and improperly
called, circumstantial evidence. Nothing can be
urged against presumptive evidence. If its rules
be strictly followed,

it is the best.

But through

prejudice, or through popular clamor, these rules
are departed from, and injustice follows.
The
blame lies with ill-informed judges, and ignorant
juries.

The value of presumptive evidence lies not

only in —
1.

That the facts on which the hypothesis of

the person's guilt is based be all proven ;
2. That they connect in an unbroken

chain

;

and
3.

That they point to, and are consistent with

the hypothesis
4.

;

but

That they are irreconcilable with any other

hypothesis whatever.
In other words the presumption of guilt must
be inevitable, and leave no doubt for guilt. But
courts and juries have again and again, in violation

SKELETON ESSAYS.

77

of law, convicted on the first three points alone,
which is no fault of presumptive evidence, but of
those who administer the law.

The naked fact, however, remains, that inno
cent men have been convicted, and this alone
should prevent a punishment which when inflicted
leaves no room for redress.
[The writer will find instances in many
or reports of celebrated trials.]

causes ceSdires,

THE SPHERE OF WOMAN.

The difference in physical power, as in habits,
between the two sexes, depends upon circum
stances, mainly upon training. If each be healthy,
a man may be trained to be effeminate, and a
women to be masculine.
A strong and over
powering idiosyncrasy will alone counteract this.
The difference in mental power naturally in the
sexes, is not in amount, but in kind.
It lies in
the combination of faculties. In the average man
the reflective powers are greater than the per
ceptive ; in the average woman the reverse
obtains.
A man generally reasons from estab
lished premises ; a woman arrives at conclusions
by intuition. To this rule, however, there are
many notable exceptions.
When we speak of " the sphere of woman", we
are not referring to the domestic relations, which

78

SKELETON ESSAYS.

are governed by the laws of sex.
The question
really is, has woman the natural capacity to seek
the same sources of maintenance and distinction
as man ? The way to determine the question is
not by theory, but facts.
There are to be sure
certain occupations from which she is debarred by

her constitution ; there are others in which to see
her engaged would not only shock our prejudices,
but outrage her feelings. We should be indignant
if women were employed in sweeping the streets,
or laboring in the public works.
Yet abroad,
where the sex is not held in the estimation, out
side of social position, that it is here, they work in
the fields and the mines alongside of men.
[The labor of woman abroad may be treated on,
consulting books of travels, consular and government
The fact that wives are commonly the business
reports.
partners of their shop-keeping husbands in France and
Germany may be commented upon. ]

Turning to the higher pursuits, history is full of
the achievements of women in competition with
In science, Mary Somerville and Miss
men.
Herschel in astronomy have their counterparts in
this country.
In general science a number of
women have achieved eminence, and it is not
necessary to point out the brilliant literary female
If our few female lawyers have not
record.
reached the eminence of the Italian signorina
who, during her father's illness, was able to lecture
successfully on the civil law to his students, yet

SKELETON ESSAYS.
they do very well.

79

As for the practice of medi

cine, our female physicians, from

Mrs. Dr. Jacobi

down, stand in their profession abreast
male colleagues.
Certainly in affairs

of their
of State,

women have not shown their incapacity, as the
record shows.
[Cite instances from the many to be found in the
histories of England, France, Germany, Russia, &c]

Women are not made for battle, yet from Joan
of Arc down, we find them, when a high sentiment
of patriotism fills them, leading the way even
there, and our own history presents many a bril
liant example.
[Consult Mrs. Ellet's "Women of the Revolution," and
"The Pioneer Women of the West," by the same author,
and Mrs. Dilke's " Woman-Suffrage."]

In art women is not

but Rosa
Bonheur does not stand alone. Scarcely any one
is unable to point to successful business women,
who have won their way to competence by
energy, decision and good judgment.
The sphere of woman is a large one.
It
embraces all fields of human venture, and enters
properly wherever she feels herself qualified to
enter into competition with the opposite sex.
so successful

;

80

SKELETON ESSAYS.
SUPERSTITION.

Superstition is not confined to the ignorant,
although education limits its power, and some
what curbs its exhibition.
For men, no matter
what contempt they may show for the followers
of the Voudoo, or the fetisch worshippers of
Africa, will not sit down with twelve others at
table, or begin an important enterprise on a Friday.
Omens, portents, death-warnings by signs or
by apparitions, have their influence even upon
educated men. The White Lady of Prussia has
her believers among the wohlgeboren, and the
Bean Sighe (vulgarly Banshee) of Ireland, is
dreaded by the educated where she is said to
appear. Men effect to laugh at the tales about
the mermaid of the English, the merrow of the
Irish, and the Mary Morgan of the Armorican
people ; and sneer at the belief of the vulgar in
the Bwbach of the Welsh, the Leprechaun or
Cluricaune of the Irish, and the Robin Goodfellow of the English ; but they will rarely sleep
voluntarily in a haunted chamber, or if driven to
it by the dread of ridicule, tremble between the
sheets, and are long awake before they suffer ex
hausted nature to drown apprehension in sleep.
Superstition appeals to the poetry of our nature.
The mind loves to dwell upon fairies, gnomes,
nixes, trolls, and the whole tribe of imaginary
beings. The grown-up man or woman, much as

SKELETON ESSAYS.

81

it,

he or she may attempt to disguise
dearly loves
the fairy tale. One who does not has a hard and

It

unlovable nature.

of

is

among the poetical races,
those of finer nervous organization, that the
popular superstition creates the most enchanting
folk-lore. Compare the legends of Russia, with
those of Ireland and Wales.
[For the purpose of treating here on

the distinction

consult Keightley's Fairy
Sikes's British Goblins, Russian Tales, and

supernatural

characters,

Mythology,
Croker's Irish Legends.]

a

a

is

is

is

Certain religious sects stigmatise the practices
of others as superstition. It not proper term.
essentially non-christian, and the
Superstition
absurd notions of some believers are the deduc
tions of ignorance. The stoutest agnostic yields
to the feeling as well as the most devout believer;
and he who inveighs most against superstition
frequently shows superstition in the denunciation.
not
matter of faith, but of
The weakness
distrust.
[The superstition of the Romans, with their augurs and
modes of divination, of the Greeks, and of the Orientals
may be treated here. Materials will be found in Niebuhr's
Rome, Grote's Greece, and in any work on Hindustan
or Persia. Consult also the encyclopedias under the
]

appropriate heads.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

82

HEREDITY.

The law of descent to be seen in plants.

In a

wild state there is little variation, like producing

Instances : —
Under artificial culture, species of plants break
into varieties. The higher the culture the more
Instances found in the apple,
diverse these.
peach, dahlia, rose, etc.
But there is always a tendency to recede to the
baser type. Seeds of the choicest varieties will
produce more inferior than superior new kinds.
The same rule holds good as to animals, man
with the others.
But it will also be observed when a new variety
is produced that it bears some resemblance to
Otherwise, it has escaped
one or both parents.
the improved, and gone back to the baser
like.

original species.

This rule seems to prevail in morals as well as
in physical conformation.
While the features of
a

child show those of both parents — or if they

show that of one, then the back portion of the
head is moulded after the other parent, so the
moral characteristics of the parents are impressed
upon the child ; but those of one parent are
generally in excess of the other. The child will
" take after " one of these so notably, that
the
peculiarities it inherits from the other in a less
degree, are lost sight of.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

83

Shakespeare says —
" In joining contrasts lieth love's delight."
Hence in mating, persons of similar physical
and mental characteristics are rarely brought to
But they transmit, like plants, their
gether.
physical and mental peculiarities to their descen
dants.
Sometimes there is a stoppage of the current.
The seed of a rose will at times prove to be utterly
unlike its parent, and yet the second generation
will possess the characteristics of one or other of
its grandparents.
In the same way in human
families, a physical mark or a moral infirmity may
not show in the second, but will appear in the
third generation.
The laws of heredity are absolute.
They may
be evaded or postponed, but will assert them
selves.
[Consult Walker on Inter-marriage, and articles on
Descent, Consanguinity, Marriage, etc., in any encyclo
pedia.]

POLITICAL PARTIES.

It

is a common trick of oratory to inveigh
against party as "the madness of the many for the

amounts to this —
" Pay great regard to us, but beware of the other
fellows". But in a free government, parties are a
necessary part of the machinery.

gain of a few".

It generally

84

SKELETON ESSAYS.

Parties are based upon ideas. The ideas of any
one may be wrong, but that is for its opponents
to discover.
The proper difference is as to the
right and wrong mode of administering the
No party can exist unless it has a
government.
defined policy in public affairs.
Its existence is
a support to that policy.
Equally necessary for the prosperity of free
institutions that there should be two parties —one
to administer the affairs of State, and the other to
watch its action, and oppose its methods. A
party so strong as to crush out all opposition,
gives way to its own worst elements, and be
comes, corrupt in its practices. The more equally
balanced in point of numbers the two parties
are, the cleaner will be the acts of the one in
It is bound over to good behavior,
power.
by the dread of being displaced at the next
election.
To object to the existence of political parties
because each contain bad men, and these bad
men engage in disreputable methods in party
action, from the primary up, is to object to civil
society — even to the church, which contains
hypocrites and time servers. These misdemeanors
are mere excrescences that are ugly, and should
be removed, but do not prevent the body from
being sound.
The common cry that we are deteriorating,
and that our political party practices are viler

SKELETON ESSAYS.

85

than those at an earlier period of the republic, is
not founded on truth.
[Examples may be found to support this position, in
Benton's Thirty years in the Senate, Randall's Life of
Jefferson, Amos's Science of Politics.]

The excesses of party are to be reprehended.
Were more honest men to actively participate
in politics, the evil would be very much
diminished.
There is still a conservative power
in what is called " Scratching ".
There are a
number of men attached to each political party,
who, when the leaders nominate bad or incapable
men, stand ready to exercise their right of
scratching such a one's name off the ticket, and
voting it thus, or substituting that of the opposing
candidate, if he be better, or better qualified.
Such men hold the balance of power, and the
exercise of their right in this way freely, soon
teaches the party-leaders the necessity of furnish
ing better candidates.
Nevertheless, if the candidates be unexcep
tionable, and the party action be in accordance
with its avowed policy, it is the duty of members
who approve that policy, to sustain their respec
tive parties in all honest and proper ways. And
this is not party madness, but a means toward
the end they desire.
It is impossible that parties should not exist
wherever the expression of thought is free. No
two persons can exactly agree upon everything
arything.

86

SKELETON ESSAYS.

They will find somewhere, somehow or in some
But between two
thing, a divergence of opinion.
proposed systems of managing public affairs there
will be a choice that will be 'taken by a nearly
equal portion of citizens. They will differ on
details, but they will be forced to take one of the
two leading systems.
The mode of administering the government of
a free State will gradually narrow itself to one or
the other, of a loose or a strict construction of the
constitution, which is the fundamental law. One
side will desire to strengthen the government, at
the expense of popular right ; the other to in
crease popular power at the expense of the
defined functions of the government. A few only
will stand by the fundamental law itself, which
steers between ; but these will be few.
The
majority will be centralists, or loose construc
tionists. So long as the two sides nearly balance
each other, the constitution will not be seriously
overridden by either.
It will be thus seen that parties are necessary
Beside the check each gives to
in a free State.
The
excess in the other, they are safety valves.
young, the enthusiastic and the ambitious have a
chance in party action to gratify their desire for
movement and their hopes of distinction, which,
without this, would cause cabals and conspiracies
to the danger of the Commonwealth.
[Consult Cluskey's Political Text Book, and the so"
of the various political parties. ]
called " Platforms

SKELETON ESSAYS.

87

INSTINCT AND REASON.

Instinct is an involuntary inward impulse, and
Reason the faculty of deducing conclusions from
premises. It has always been assumed that man,
as a superior animal, was alone possessed of the
argumentative faculty, while the actions of dogs,
horses, birds, and the other inferior animals were
governed by instinct only. It is at least a moot
question whether this assumption be true or
erroneous.
There are numerous well-authenticated in
stances which lead us to doubt its truth.
A
Greenock (Scotland) Journal tells about a colley
dog on a farm which, after being directed by his
master to seize and hold a sheep affected by skindisease, ^p which an ointment was to be applied,
and another and another in succession, after the
third, needed no more instructions, but took
in turn each sheep that had marks of disease upon
It can scarcely be right to
him and no others.
credit this to instinct.
De Candolle, in the " Bibliotheque Universelle
de Geneve" tells of two dogs on the sea-shore on
One of these writhed on hot sand in
a hot day.
The other scraped out the
evident discomfort.
sand with his paws until he reached the wet part
below, where he lay down in the cold, damp bed,
Here was reason, the
and enjoyed the comfort.
result of observation and deduction in the one,
and its absence in the other.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

88

;

a

it,

Broderip, a trustworthy writer, speaks of a dog
which had lost his master. The path over which
the dog was running with his nose down led to a
road that crossed east and west. When he came
he took the eastern direction, and finding no
to
little into the western direction.
scent there, ran
Still getting no traces, he ran at once on the
northern path without putting his nose to the
Here was a clear case of the reasoning
ground.
He went along the upper path he has
faculty,
not turned to the right or left, ergo, he has gone

;

straight on.
Other animals frequently display something
more than mere instinct in their actions.
The
mode in which the beavers construct their dams
and houses, shows judgment, and a knowledge
of cause and effect and the domestic rat has
A
again and again giving evidence of deduction.
study of the habits of the ordinary ant will at
is

least raise a doubt whether even among the
smallest insects there
not evidence of fore
thought, calculation and powers of inference.

[In support of

these propositions and to enforce them,

:

materials may be gathered from either of the following
accessible works —
Ronnie's Insect Architecture,

Morris's Dogs and their
Doings, Bell's British Quadrupeds, Crouch's Illustration
of Instinct, Chambers's Anecdotes of Dogs, Garret's
Marvels and Mysteries of Instinct, Jesse's Gleanings in
Natural History, Romaine's Animal Intelligences.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

89

MRS. GRUNDY.

In the old comedy of "Speed the Plough," the
farmer's wife is nervously anxious about wlj.at a
neighbor, Mrs. Grundy, will say about the doings
around her. At last, her husband loses patience,
and exclaims — " Dom Missus Grundy !" a bit of
rustic profanity which though not justifiable, was
at least excusable.
The prevalence of the fear of the Mrs. Grundys
about us, and its consequences upon human action
are to be deplored. Every man has his Mrs.
Grundy, and every woman too — not in any one
individual, but in the aggregate mass. The reflec
tion what people may say —people too for whom
we don't care a straw, and whose individual
judgment may be worthless, weakens effort, and
paralyses independence. It creates extravagance.
It begets a thousand follies.
Instances : —
A young couple start in life. He earns enough
to maintain a wife and possible children — nay,
even to lay a little aside for a rainy day. She is
industrious and painstaking. Prudence and thrift
say, creep before you walk, and walk before you
fly. Get a room, and what things are absolutely
necessary, and no more. Add to them as you
can afford it. Let the addition be of comforts,
not luxuries. But the fear of Mrs. Grundy comes
in. Mrs. Grundy will turn up her nose at your

90

SKELETON ESSAYS.

poor little room, your six Windsor chairs, your
pine table, your shabby patch of ingrain carpet,
your maple bedstead, and your white-ware dishes.
So the young couple buy, on credit, a smart
Brussels carpet, gingerbread furniture for parlor
and bedroom, nick-nacks, curtains and whatnot,

The
and no less than three rooms are needed.
furniture is to be paid for on the instalment plan,
and the creditor's weekly call is as inexorable as
fate. A fit of sickness comes, the wages are
stopped, down comes the furniture man and
strips the place, and Mrs. Grundy says, " What
fools these be," and in this instance, at least,
Mrs. Grundy is right.
A young couple better provided than usual
with means to support themselves comfortably,
are not contented with their quiet and easy life.
They have no inclination for dress and display,
for the whirl of parties, routs and fashionable
resorts. Their tastes are homelike, and, let alone,
they would pass through life in a quiet way. But
the wife happens to be good-looking, and the
husband proud of his wife's looks and manner. Gr
it may be that she is homely, but piques herself
on her style. Mrs. Grundy gets in her fine work.
She reports that the husband is a tyrant, keeping
his wife out of society from arbitrary will, or
because he is jealous, or because he is mean and
miserly. Pride is aroused, and the couple, because
Mrs. Grundy must be placated, rush into expenses

SKELETON ESSAYS.

91

The ultimate result is
beyond their means.
financial embarrassment, perhaps a gross scandal.
Retrenchment comes when too late, and domestic
The old quiet
discord replaces domestic peace.
of the family circle has gone forever, the luxuries
have to be abandoned, and instead of plentiful
comfort, it is often difficult to obtain necessaries.
Mrs. Grundy shrugs her shoulders and exclaims —
"A very extravagant couple !" and no one gain
says the judgment of Mrs. Grundy in the
premises.
[The politician who, at the dictation of
revolts

;

legislative

which his conscience
the man who spends his time and money in

caucus, votes

for

a

a

measure at

company with improper companions, for fear otherwise he
may be considered to be wife ridden ; the woman who
neglects her wifely duties for gossip and idle visits, or
who indulges in expenditure for dress beyond her
means

;

the clergyman who fears to denounce vice lest he

may be set down as sensational — all these may be en
larged upon as instances of the controlling power of Mrs.

Grundy.]

COURAGE.

Courage does not always imply the absence of
When there is no fear, either through a
fear.
brutal unconsciousness of danger, or that habit or
drill which makes the soldier a machine without
For true
apprehension, courage does not exist.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

92

-

courage is that sterling quality which enables its
possessor to face the peril he appreciates with a
firm purpose to do all the fighting that may be
needed.

Mere physical courage, as the world under
stands it, is to be seen in the game-cock and bull
dog ; but their ferocity, when analysed, is found
to be an uncalculating combativeness.
The same
kind of courage is evolved when men's passions
are up, and they are engaged in a fight. Percep
tion and reason are held in abeyance for the time.
In the same way, through the discipline which
reduces him to a mechanical part of an army, the
common soldier faces death with indifference.
In these cases there is an apparent absence of
fear.

The passion of fear is generally begotten by

a

keen sense of danger, or by mystery ; and in the
first two instances the sense of danger does not
exist, or is balanced by habit, or overcome by
stronger passions.
Where the danger is vague it is more apt to
weaken courage. Thus the best trained soldiers
are not to be depended upon in a night-attack ;
and even in daytime some mysterious thing may
excite a panic which ends in a precipitate retreat.
But let the danger be defined — a battery to storm,
an overwhelming force to be met, or a key-posi
tion to be held at the sacrifice of life, and moral
courage is evoked. The man knows he is going

SKELETON ESSAYS.

93

to die, but he goes steadily to his duty, and dies
at his post.
[Describe the death of the Spartans at Thermopylae,
the charge

of

the Light Brigade

at Balaklava, and simi

lar instances from the various histories.
martyrs furnish illustrations.]

The Christian

The highest kind of moral courage is shown
where there is no risk of life. In fact fear of ridi
cule will frequently lead the individual to acts of
daring that involve personal danger. Hence a
great coward will fight desperately in the ranks
rather than face the contempt of his comrades.
Moral courage is the reverse of this. The man
who in face of popular abuse, insult and hatred,
quietly perseveres in his duty ; who continues on
a course which he knows to be right in spite of
sneers, jeers and slander, displays the highest
kind of moral courage. Such a man is a hero.
That is the courage which leads to martyrdom
sometimes, but always to the martyrdom of the
soul.
[Cite and dilate upon the course of Dr. Jenner, the in
troducer of vaccination,

amidst the assaults and

ridi

of Sydenham, who changed the
professional treatment of small-pox, in opposition to
the prejudice of his colleagues ; and of parallel cases
of moral courage to be found in history. A brief re
The en
view of the struggle of each should be given.
deavor of Fulton, and his persistence with the steam
boat in spite of contemporary ridicule, will furnish a
cule of the public

strong instance.]

;

U

SKELETON ESSAYS.

Peroration. — The value of courage in the carry
ing out of ideas of public benefit, and developing
the prosperity of communities, and its powerful
influence as an example for others to emulate.
[The missionary, the explorer, and even the invader
are examples of what courage will do.
The exploits of
Dr. Judson, found in his Life, those of Dr. Livingston,
Captain Cook, Father De Smet, Stanley, and others, all
accessible to the writer, either in their individual lives
or travels, or under their names in the Encyclopedias,
will furnish materials for working up this essay to any
required extent.]

STRIPPING THE GROUND.

At

one time Palestine was exceedingly fertile.
In the time of the kings of Israel, the ground re
tained the fertility which had made it so attrac
tive to Moses and his followers, for though Moses
was not to inherit, he knew very well the richness
of the promised land. To-day it is in great part
barren. This was owing to stripping the ground
of its forest growth. The woodland not alone
shelters the ground, and so preserves and con
denses the moisture, but is the cause of a more
even rainfall.
The forest removed, and it is not
long before the rains become irregular —there is
excessive drought at one time, and furious tem
pests at another.
Minor vegetation becomes un
certain. The fertilizing salts and the humic acid

SKELETON ESSAYS.
are washec.

from the soil.

05

The land becomes

sterile.

The most fertile ground in course of time be
comes barren

if over-cropped annually, without

returning anything to the soil.

The yearly loss

trifling, but it amounts in course of time to
To
enough to render the ground unproductive.
cultivate one kind of crop alone, year in and year
out, has the same effect in the end. The sedgefields to be found through the older settled parts
of the United States tell the story. The ground
has been stripped there.
is

[This prelude, varied according to the taste and abil
ity of the writer, may be worked up, after reading almost
any modern book of travels in the Holy Land, and con
trasting the descriptions of the place in the present day
with the references in Holy Writ to the fertility of Ca
naan before and after it was taken possession of by the
Israelites.

Having

thus

from careful reading of a

worked up the matter, draw
standard work on agricultural

chemistry, the cause of sterility by over-cultivation, and
then proceed to the real points of the essay, somewhat
as follows.]

The ground, dried and parched, from having
been denuded of its forests, may be restored in
time by judicious planting, and new springs start
from the soil. The worn-out land, by careful
planting and ploughing of clover or other means,
and the addition of bone-dust, ashes and other
sources of the required salts, may regain its fertil

96

SKELETON ESSAYS.

But when we have stripped the human
ity.
mind of all its imagination and higher impulses
by false rules of society, or over-cropped the
young intellect by too severe mental tasks, the
evil is beyond remedy.
The present system of education threatens the
utter destruction of thousands, over whose minds
there is rapidly falling the mantle of sterility.
The curriculum of instruction in our common
schools, already too large, is growing larger day
by day. They begin instruction at six years,
when the mind is entirely immature.
If it were
confined to the alphabet and the spelling-book,
and but an hour a day were given to these, it
would do no harm. But it does not stop here ;
and girls and boys of ten years are filled with
rules of grammar, mathematical problems, natur
al philosophy, and so on, until at fourteen they
are expected to be masters of all the ologies.
They are crammed as turkeys are with food. Nor
is one step on the ladder of learning set firmly,
Such instruc
before another has to be mounted.
tion is necessarily superficial, and in active life al
most entirely fades out. The ground is stripped
It is
of all that pleases, and is over-cropped.
time that there was a radical change.
[Consult Hazeltine's British and American Education,
Spencer's Education, Swett's Method of Teaching, &c]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

97

LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT.

The first local self-government is literally

_
s.
13

home rule. It begins in the family. But it is not
free government.
It is patriarchal and despotic,
not republican or representative. The head of
the family is necessarily a despot.
In a state of nature individuals aggregate into
communities, and place some one at the head to
lead, and assign to others certain trusts. The
head soon usurps power. He becomes a chief;
as the community grows, a prince ; and as other
communities join with the first, or it becomes so
strong that it splits into several communities, he
becomes a king, and assumes absolute power. In this state of affairs it becomes as necessary
as in a republic that each community should
govern itself. In the despotism this comes in
order to relieve the central power of trouble ; in
a republic or a constitutional monarchy, because
the principle underlying it is part of the general
freedom.
Local self-government grew in many parts of
Europe and in England, because the great nobles
became so strong that they threatened the power
of the sovereign, and the expedient of a rival
power was resorted to. Hence the free cities,
with their self control, and the trade guilds and
mercantile societies, were created by the King,

CENTRALjCOLLECp0*

SKELETON ESSAYS.

98

not through any desire to make a portion of his
subjects free, but to check the arrogance of the
noble houses.
But, no matter how it came, municipal self-gov
ernment, subordinate of course to the central
power in certain things, has come to every civil
It even exists
ized country, and come to stay.
in a feeble sort of way in a semi-civilized country
like Russia, where the villages manage their own
affairs to a considerable degree'.
In this country it is the basis of our institutions
resting upon a broader base, namely, thereservation of individual rights. The States created the
Federal Union, and gave it certain supreme pow
ers, reserving to themselves the right of self-gov
ernment, of punishing offences against their own
peace and dignity, and of eminent domain, the
highest power of sovereignty in a State. They
create cities, counties, towns, and corporations
generally, giving them the power of self-govern
ment, subject to the general laws, and the funda
mental law of each which is popularly known as a
constitution.
laid out his exordium as above, in such
words as he may think best, the writer will draw a com
parison between local self-government and its absence,
[Having

by giving a description of the management of a village
in Turkey or other absolute country, drawn from trust
worthy books of travels, and that of the city or town
in which he lives, taken from its charter.
He may

SKELETON ESSAYS.

99

of

the lack of safety to person and prop
erty that would follow, if this local representative form
were taken away, and that of a cadi or vizir substituted.]
draw a picture

It is

often objected that municipal corporations
are apt to overload themselves with debt, and that
in consequence of popular suffrage,their treasury
becomes a plunder-mine for unscrupulous politi
cians. The truth of this must be admitted, but it
does not militate against the principle of the sys
tem.
The State legislature might prevent the one
abuse by restricting the legal amount o/ indebt
edness.
The remedy for the other lies with the
people themselves. If they choose to entrust
their affairs to knavish or incompetent hands, the
penalty of their folly falls upon themselves. In
private business fortunes are often wrecked by the
thievery or neglect of clerks, and banks and in
surance companies are ruined by defaulting offi
cers ; no one has given those facts as a reason for
abolishing private business, or for refusing to
charter financial companies.
There are two reasons for local self-govern
ment. One is that the general government is
thus relieved of petty details, and the other, and
by far the strongest, that the people of a given
locality know best their own peculiar wants and
needs.
[Consult Wilson's Debates on the Constitution ; the
Federalist, Story on the Constitution, and cases involv

ing the political rights of

the States, municipalities and

205295B

SKELETON ESSAYS.

100

federal

government

in the various reports of the U. S.

Supreme Court.]

THE DUTY OF A CRIMINAL LAWYER.

It

is frequently made the ground

of censure of

our law that a lawyer, knowing that his client is
guilty of the crime with which he is charged,
makes every endeavor to acquit him. It is said
that an honest lawyer, in such a situation, should
throw up the case.
Such a position betrays gross ignorance of the
principles which underlay our system of jurispru
dence, and, if carried out, would be productive of
wrong and injustice. It would place every per
son accused of crime at the mercy of his advocate,
and would leave many innocent men without a

jury trial.
The law pre-supposes every man accused of
crime to be innocent, until his guilt be proven be
yond doubt. It requires that he should be pro
vided with counsel, have the compulsory attend
ance of witnesses, be fairly tried before a court of
competent jurisdiction, and should in no case
have confession extorted from him by force, trick
or device. That is the essential of a criminal trial
under our laws.
A counsel is given him because he may be ig
norant of the forms of law, and may be too much

'-'

SKELETON ESSAYS.

101

?

is

it,

excited by the peril of his position, to conduct his
defence as coolly as if he were a disinterested or
uninterested person. A counsel is his represen
tative in interest.
The counsel, being his representative in inter
est, Is to do as the prisoner desires him to do, ac
He is to know
cording to his legal knowledge.
all about the facts that the prisoner does, that he
may more fully represent him. To betray that
knowledge as he would by throwing up the case,
is to violate his oath of office, and to usurp the
functions of judge and jury. It is to basely betray
It is to convert himself into a mix
confidence.
ture of rogue and fool.
But it does not follow that he must resort to
vulgar trickery to secure his client's acquittal. It
is told of Erskine that on one occasion, having to
defend a thief, he learned from him that the linen
he had stolen from the bleaching-green was of a
new and peculiar pattern, and had never been
" Have you
placed before the public for sale.
"Yes, all, hidden away, but one
any of it?"
" Get your wife and
piece, which they found."
daughters to make me at once, a dozen shirts
have them done up, and sent to me the
from
When the trial came
day before the trial."
The complaintErskine wore one of the shirts.
"Are you sure", asked
ant identified the linen.
"
on the market
Erskine, "that no such linen
" Please examine this," said Ers
•*
Quite sure."

102

SKELETON ESSAYS.

kine, drawing up his coat sleeve, and showing
"That is the same linen."
part of his shirt.
"
" Good heaven ! cried the counsel, indignantly,
" Is a man's life to be sworn away in this fashion.
I have eleven of just such shirts at home. I shall
let this go to the jury, your lordship, without a
word of comment or calling a single witness.''
If the story be
The jury acquitted the accused.
not apochryphal, Erskine descended to trickery
of a low order.
The prosecuting attorney, or counsel for the
State is often apt to overstep his duty in another
way, and to make it a matter of pride to convict,
even if the evidence be defective.
In this, he
mistakes his duty. The counsel for the defence
represents an individual. He is provided by the
benignity of the law that the prisoner may lose
none of his rights through inefficient advocacy.
But the public prosecutor represents the State.
The State inquires whether her law has been
broken, and her dignity offended.
Her investi
gation is not malignant ; the accused is under
If he be guilty, she demands his con
protection.
viction ; if his guilt be not manifest, she demands
The prosecutor is her counsel to
his acquittal.
Where he
assist her in determining the point.
is himself not convinced beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused has committed an offence, he
wrongs his client by insisting pertinaciously on
conviction, and if he resort to the art of elo

SKELETON ESSAYS.

103

quence, or baser tricks, to ensure an unjust result,
he degrades himself.
[Consult

cases

in Celebrated Trials.]

POVERTY AND

DRUNKENNESS.

Poverty is set down generally

as a result

of

drunkenness, and no doubt one of the conse
quences of the abuse of alcoholic drinks is pau
perism. Thrift and a besotted brain do not well
harmonize.
But is not the converse proposition to a certain
extent true ? Is not drunkenness frequently the
result of poverty ? Does not many times the
poor wretch, baffled in the chase for a subsistence,
resort to drink to drown his sorrows and console
him for his disappointments, and so sink into a
deeper depth ?
We can only draw safe inferences from such
as are part of public records.
The testimony of
the inmates of almshouses is not always trust
worthy. Few there will acknowledge that their
poverty is the result of dissipation, except when
they think it would please the visitor, when they
are aptto exaggerate the other way. The official
records of pauperism in the several States would
go to prove that abstinence from drink is a fruit
ful cause of pauperism — an absurdity that the

104

SKELETON ESSAYS.

For it is a notorious fact that
judgment rejects.
by far the greater percentage to the population
of pauperism, both of those receiving out-door
relief, or the inmates of almshouses, is to be
found in the States of Maine, Vermont and New
Hampshire, where the manufacture and sale of
liquor has been prohibited by law for more than
half a century. The census and other official
data show that the ratio of pauperism there is
more than twice as large as in the States of New
York and New Jersey, where liquor is as free as
air, and nearly as freely imbibed.
But that is only a superficial view. Looking
under the surface, we find that the amount of in
toxicants, imported as well as home-made, con
sumed in Maine and its two neighboring States,
is frightful, and being driven to cover, those who
indulge in the habit, are more reckless and more
persistent than in the States where prohibition is
not on the statute books. It is the nature of the
human animal to desire the forbidden, and before
that desire all laws fail of enforcement. But this
is more strikingly true when the offence is not one
of those mala in se, but merely mala prohibita ;
and still more when the law is made to protect the
individual against himself, and not his neighbors
against him. When the old blue laws forbade a
man to kiss his wife on Sundays, there was doubt
less more domestic osculation on the Christian
Sabbath than on all the other days of the week.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

105

Drunkenness and poverty beget each other. A
poor wretch, shivering with cold and pinched
with hunger, getting a half-dime, which will not
procure him a full meal, is apt to spend it in a
dram, which gives him a momentary warmth,
and a cessation of appetite. As quantity is more
to him than quality, the liquor he drinks is ex
tremely poisonous, and the reaction that follows
His doom soon
incapacitates him from exertion.
becomes fixed.
A visit to the tenement dens of our large cities
will serve to teach any one the close connection
between poverty and drunkenness.
It is true that
malt liquors are driving out ardent spirits to some
extent, and the consumption of large quantities of
these do not seem incompatible with thrift among
our citizens of German birth. But they do not
operate the same upon those of other nationalities,
especially Americans, who are not phlegmatic,
and who are prone to carry any habit to excess.
The quantity of beer consumed in this country
has grown to an enormous amount. In Germany,
where they drink beer from childhood up, drunk
Here it
enness is looked upon as disgraceful.
seems to be otherwise. Abroad the man once
seen drunk is tabooed. Here he does not lose
his social position until his drunkenness becomes^
common.
[Examine the volume on Social Statistics of the last
United States census. Consult Dr. English's Argument

SKELETON ESS ATS.

106

the New Jersey House of As
Governor Andrew's Argument before the Mas

before the Committee
sembly

;

of

sachusetts Legislature. ]

OFFICE HUNTING,

Political parties are doubtless a necessity in a
free country, if we would have the fellows in
in power, through fear of being turned out, doing
less mischief than they otherwise would. But the
continual hope of reward by the camp followers
of either party has generated an itch for office
which results in some very disgusting doings
whenever one party goes out and another comes
Swarms of applicants for place pester the
victors, and one party in this matter is just as bad
as the other.
The crowd of applicants is mainly for the
smaller and inconsequential positions, which ren
ders the pursuit puzzling as well as amusing to the .
outside spectator. Go to any of our larger cities,
and observe the number of applicants for the sit
Some of these are men who
uation of policeman.
are better fitted to be arrested themselves than to
But the great mass of them are
arrest others.
artisans, who can earn at their several trades more
wages than the average policeman receives, with
less labor, and far less risk to health.
Why,
then, do they covet such places ? It is not the
in.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

107

reward, nor is it any fixity of tenure, for every
patrolman is pursued nightly by a roundsman,
who tries to catch him tripping, in order to get
some crony in his place. It is simply because it
dresses him pendente officio in a little " brief au
thority", and gratifies his vanity.
That is the key to the mystery of universal
place-hunting. The applicant desires to be gaped
at as part of the machinery of the State. He
chases an office like men abroad do the stars and
crosses of Knightly orders, for its intrinsic value.
To this, in many instances, there is superadded
in some offices, a chance for plunder, and here
avarice steps in to the aid of vanity.
Of late an attempt has been made to cure, or
at least modify this evil, by the introduction of
another, in the shape of what is facetiously called
"civil service reform". This means to insure a
life tenure in all minor offices, and so, after the
fashion of England, to create a bureaucracy, to
tie up all civil action with additional red tape,
and perpetuate a privileged class which shall be
perfect in the fine art of "how not to do it."
Thus far, fortunately for the public interests,
the scheme has been a failure. It has failed for
various reasons. Foremost among them was the
office-hunting craze, which forced the appointing
power, in order to keep its party together, to
evade or defy the provisions of the law. Then
came the conviction among the people that the

108

SKELETON ESSAYS.

party in power should.be held responsible for the
entire conduct of public affairs, and to secure this
responsibility should be vested with the appoint
ment of every official. These two causes, operat
ing together have rendered the law itself an
object of ridicule, and its enforcement impossible.
The assumption in favor of the measure that
fixed tenure would generate attention to duty and
civility of manner, has proven to be unfounded.
The action where the law has been obeyed has
been the reverse.
The claim that it would secure
competent persons has been equally overthrown
by the facts.
It has also been assumed that when a compe
tent person had been found to fill an office, he
should remain during life because his place could
not be readily supplied, is equally baseless. Even
in expert positions, when the party dies, there
has neverbeen any difficulty in finding a successor
equally competent. But the majority of offices
can be readily and acceptably filled by any per
sons of moderate capacity and fair education.
The higher offices require, though they do not
always get, the services of men of higher capacity ;
but these are exempt from the operation of the
law. No one proposes to submit a Secretary of
State, or the Governor of a State, to a preliminary
His appointment
examination to test his fitness.
depends on the caprice of the President, or the
whim of the people.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

109

scramble for office
after every Presidential or Gubernatorial election,
or in the various municipalities yearly, is not the
worst evil.
Experience has shown that the elec
tion by the people in many cases where the ex
ecutive used to appoint, has given us no worse
officials.
One-half of them may be said to be
partially competent, and a quarter not too scrup
A cabal
ulous. The reason is not far to seek.
rules in both cases, governing the President and
the Governor, and ruling the ward primaries and
the nominating conventions.
It would be still
worse if we had few changes in office, and cor
ruption and
peculation were covered up by
bureaucratic influence. The remedy for the evil
of incompetent or corrupt officials consists in vot
ing against the party which selects improper men,
and replacing it for a time by another.
But, perhaps, the general

[Consult the public journals during an election can
vass, and the local experience of yourself and friends.
They will give you ample data, from which to elaborate

your

essay.]

MANAGEMENT OF CHILDREN.
Bachelors' wives and old maids' children,"
says the sarcastic proverb, "are well governed".
The less experience we have, the more confident
we are of our power to discreetly manage affairs,
and consequently proceed to verify Shakspeare's
*'

110

SKELETON ESSAYS.

I

;

it,

line, that — " Fools rush in where angels fear to
tread".
Do we not, as a general thing, attempt to man
age children too much ? The little things are like
trees — too much training and pruning stunts
them, and too much manuring produces an un
healthy growth. The experience of almost every
one is that children trained too strictly rarely turn
out well. Children are prone, like grown people,
to get out of bounds that are made too narrow.
The cruelty that represses mere animal spirits,
and that forces buoyant children to unnatural
silence and gravity, defeats its aim. Love for the
parent is quenched by hatred of the oppressor.
One fruitful cause of the ill-doing of men is
that when children they were restrained from the
natural enjoyment of childhood. They avenge
themselves on society when entirely emancipa
ted from slavery.
Instead of self-regulated free
dom they indulge in license. They have, even
when very young, a keen sense of injustice and
their worst pas
wrong, and by brooding over
sions strengthen
and the parent who thought
lessly exhibits weaknesses before a child, earns
" If you do that again," said the
its contempt.
angry mother, " I'll whip you". " don't be'ieve
oo," replied the little one.
A distin
Children
are imitative animals.
guished writer tells a story of his own, which
may amuse.

He was residing with his family,

in

SKELETON ESSAYS.

Ill

order to look after some property, in a wild part
of the country, where his diet was confined

salt pork and chickens. Butcher's
meat could rarely be had. He expressed his dis
gust at this once or twice, loudly and a little pro
One day he was seated in his office,
fanely.
writing, when he heard the children at play on
the veranda. " I'll play papa," said one of them,
a little girl of eight.
He peeped and listened.
The child put its hand behind its back, and, strid
ing in long steps along the floor, said: "Dam'f
mainly to

I

'tan' this 'tarvation any longer".
While some begin harshly with children at the

it

it

it,

very beginning, there are others, and by far the
larger number, who err on the other side. They
let the little ones do as they choose, give them
their own sweet way in everything, suffer them to
smash their toys and other things, and let them
be social pests, until they have arrived at the age
of ten or thereabouts ; then they begin to train
them. Of course, such training is a failure. The
child can see no reason for such unwonted strict
ness. It understands the punishment, because it
can feel that; to escape
generally resorts to
the only defense
possesses, lying. The habits
thus acquired, never leave it.

pulsion

is

[Contrast the difference between driving and leading.
Early leading will rarely need subsequent coercion.
Early driving will make leading, when the age for com
past, abortive and impossible.

112

BKELETON ESSAYS.

Cruelty in the parent engenders rebellion and duplic
ity in the child. Laxity of judicious control makes a
child willful, headstrong and an " enfant terrible."
A parent must be truthful, just and gently firm, to
make a child truthful and gentle.]

LUCK AND PLUCK.

There are instances of absolute good-fortune
wherein no design of the recipient can be dis
cerned. The case of "Lord" Timothy Dexter,
the famous down-east merchant, may be cited in
point. It is said of him that in discharge of a
debt, he took the only property the man had,

They
namely, three thousand warming-pans.
hung upon his hands. One day the master of one
of his vessels, about to clear for the West Indies
in quest of rum, molasses and sugar, asked him
what his outward cargo should be. " Take those
warming-pans," was the answer. The master
obeyed orders promptly, and the vessel sailed.
Every one laughed at the ridiculous notion of
sending warming-pans to a tropical climate.
In
due time, the vessel returned, well laden with
molasses and sugar. "How did the warmingpans suit }" inquired Dexter. "First rate," replied
the captain.
"They were just the thing the
sugar-makers wanted. The tops made splendid
strainers, and the pans fine ladles, and I sold them

SKELETON ESSAYS.

113

all at a round price. The whole return cargo did
not cost a cent of cash." Here was luck, pure and
simple.
But as a general thing luck may be found to
have a basis of foresight, and a superstructure of
pluck, which is only persistence in an object.
Men are prone to talk of good fortune ; but it will
be generally found to be the dexterous seizing
and pluckily holding on to an opportunity by the
The man who neglects
supposed lucky man.
the chance, or does not pursue it undauntedly, is
termed unlucky, but without cause ; and pluck
has frequently overcome the most continued illluck, and won good fortune out of the most unfortuitous circumstances.

—
[Instances to be cited and enlarged upon;
1. Bruce at the Castle of Rathlin, off the coast of
Antrim, seeing

the spider, has his pluck renewed.

had been beaten again and again

;

He

but takes new courage,

and wins freedom for his country and a crown for him
self. See any history of Scotland for particulars.
2. The victory of Crecy, in France, where pluck over
Consult Sir John Froissart's "Chron
came numbers.
icles."

The career of Columbus, — a striking instance of
" Life of Columbus," and Prespluck. Consult Irving's
"
cott's " Ferninand and Isabella.
3.

See Life of Robert
Fulton and the steamboat.
Fulton.
5. The explorations of Africa by Stanley and others.
4.

114

SKELETON ESSAYS.

See Stanley's Travels in Africa ;

Mungo Park's Travels

;

and the Travels of Barth, Burton, &c.
6.

The progress of remarkable inventions : — the cotton

gin ; the electric telegraph

;

the

reaping machine

;

the

sewing machine, and others.]

On the other hand the lack of that persistence
called pluck has led to many prominent failures.
Ill luck may be set down, in nine cases out of ten,
to lack of foresight, lack of energy, and above all,
lack of pluck.
PRIMEVAL MAN.

When we look at our savages in this country, as
they were when Europeans first landed on these
shores, we find them ignorant of the uses of
metals, except possibly along Lake Superior,
where, finding copper in its native state, they
may have hammered it into a rude knife.
Their
usual weapons of war were the club, the stone axe,
the stone lance-head, and the stone arrow-tip. In
mechanical arts, they went no farther than a rude
pottery. If some of the Western tribes displayed
ingenuity in the manufacture' of textile fabrics, it
is doubtful if this was not taught by the Spaniards.
Even the dresses of the Mexicans and Peruvians
The skins of animals, poorly pre
were coarse.
pared, formed their principal clothing. The socalled architectural remains are little more than
artificial caverns.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

115

Recent researches show that primeval man in
the old world was very much like the same ani
mal in the new. Between the stone celts and
arrow heads found in the caverns of Europe, and
those picked up in the fields of the United States,
there is scarcely any difference. The white sav
age in the old time was as' barbarous and as
ignorant as the red was when the civilized man
came here.

He even had his cheap stimulant in

the shape of starchy roots, chewed, and fermented

by saliva.
Mentally, the savage of the white race was not
cultivated. To him the winds, the storm, and
the lightning were mysterious things, forming
either gods or demons, as occasion prompted.

As

form and became
myths, and these became objects of worship.
Above all the sun, as the source of light and heat,
In course of time,
became the Supreme Deity.
as the mind developed, he looked beyond these
things for the invisible Creator. Then religion
became revealed, and assumed shape and form,
and fuller intellectual and moral growth fol
lowed. It was a long time before men aggregated
into communities, and learned by combination
to repress the wrong of the individual strong
hand.
Civilization was a thing of slow growth.
It is
preceded by an increase of mechanical ingenuity,
and of the religious principle.
Hence those mis
he grew,

they assumed

SKELETON ESSAYS.

116

sions are most successful among Pagans that
teach at the same time the constructive arts.
[Trace the growth of religions, and the forms they as
Consult for this pur
sume, among barbarous people.
pose, S. Earing Gould's Origin and Development of Re

For other points,

Lubbock's Origin
of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man ; addi
ligious Belief.

tional information

see

on the subject may be obtained by

consulting the proper heads in Appleton's Cyclopedia, or
the Cyclopedia Britannica, and a farther comparison may
be drawn between

primeval man on the two continents,

after perusing Catlin's North American Indians,

various

ethnological

publications

of

the

and the

Smithsonian

Institution.]

HYPOCRISY AND CANT.
Some one has said that hypocrisy is " the hom
age which vice pays to virtue". A rather smart
saying, as sayings go, but not a definition.
Hy
pocrisy is rather a cloak used by a rascal to hide
his designs, or oftener, a disguise assumed to gain
Sometimes, nay, frequently, it is
a specific end.
so flimsy that he must have moral blindness who
can not see through it ; but occasionally it is never
lifted from the wearer, so impenetrable is it, until
he be dead and gone.
Nor is hypocrisy always deliberate. The prac
tices of the hypocrite often grow upon him grad
ually, and even not entirely known to himself. It

SKELETON ESSAYS.

117

sometimes comes from an amiable rather than a
malicious feeling, from a desire not to offend.
Mrs. A. puts on a show of friendship when she
meets Mrs. B., though she dislikes her. The pri
mary object may not be to deceive, but may
result from an amiability which forbids her to
show a lack of courtesy rather than wound the
It is all wrong, beyond
feelings of her visitor.
doubt, but it is rarely hypocrisy, since Mrs. B.,
who goes through the same form with Mrs. C,
This is
estimates the matter at its true worth.
the hypocrisy of form, and we can afford to laugh
at it.
But the most detestable hypocrisy, is that of
the religious order, where the man assumes in
public a correctness of conduct which he abandons
in private, and a devotion he does not feel. It
rarely inspires respect, since it is usually accom
panied by a Pharisaism which repels the confi
dence, even if it do not inspire the doubt of the
on-looker; and yet this is sometimes not so much
the intent to deceive others as to make up, by
excessive observance of externals, for the lack of
internal grace — a sort of debtor and creditor ac
count with heaven. Here hypocrisy is as much
weakness as wickedness.
Along with hypocrisy comes cant, which is the
attempt to make words supply the place of deeds.
There is the cant of piety —
Cant is various.
a set of terms and sayings that are incompatible

SKELETON ESSAYS.

118

with true piety.

The really pious man has little
is

a

a

is

a

is

a

it, it

is

it

is

is

is

is

it

is

is

is

is

it

it,

to say about
and
by no means disposed to
blow his own horn, nor to feel comfortable when
blown for him.
Your really pious man
humble and modest.
There
the cant of patriotism.
The man who
really loves his country has little to say about it.
He keeps his patriotism in reserve till there
occasion for its exercise. He does not think him
self the Phcenix of his tribe, but loving his coun
try concludes
worthy of love, and therefore
supposes that the mass of the citizens have the
same feeling with himself.
When Dr. Johnson
said that " patriotism
the last refuge of scoun
drel", he meant the cant of patriotism — assumed
by the very men who would sell their country, its
interests and its honor, on the first profitable
opportunity.
There
the cant of birth. It
very pleasant,
doubtless, to reflect that we have had a grand
father, or some remote ancestor, who was notable
in some way, and wasn't hanged or sentenced to
If be an incentive to virtue
penal servitude.
and honorable exertion, so as not to impair the
family honor,
very good thing to have.
But to brag of
to be thrusting the dead bones
of our forefathers in every one's nostrils,
kind
of cant one gets tired of, and longs to meets some
one who
not the little end of
family, but its
founder.

SKELETON ESSAYS.
[The

119

cant of honor.

of public spirit.
Ad infinitum.]

The cant of brains. The cant
The cant of virtue. The cant of truth.

Last of all, the most disgusting of all, the cant
of money. This is the talk of the man who has
nothing in the world, poor fellow but his money.
He is eternally talking about " we taxpayers", as
though the man who toils did not pay all the
taxes in his rent, and in the cost of his clothing
!

and food, and despite the fact that nine times out
of ten he makes, in some shape or other, an in
sufficient return of his personal property, and
tries to have his real estate undervalued.
He
"
solid men", which is literally
cants about the
true, the money getter, proud of his cash, being
generally furnished with brains of putty and
heart of stone, and thus far solid enough.
Hypocrisy is the parent of many vices, but Cant,
its eldest daughter, has a more numerous progeny.

WHAT SHALL WE DO WITH MR, LO?

What shall we do with the copper-colored
native of the soil, rather than what shall become
of him, fs one of the pressing questions of the day.
The philanthropist looks a little to the good of
the Indian ; but the greater part of the public is
not made up of philanthropists, and looks merely
to the good of the greatest number. With ninety

ISO

SKELETON ESSAYS.

nine out of a hundred, the greatest number means

"number one".

What will benefit the whole country in this
matter is the problem to be solved. Fortunately
for right and justice, the well-being of the Indian
is necessary to a proper solution, and facts and
experience show that injustice to the red race
would be apt to work a demoralization to the
white, from the effects of which we would not
recover for years.
That the Indian would not entirely abandon
his nomadic habits has been confidently asserted
so long, without any show of denial, that men
have overlooked its practical contradiction in
many instances. There is civilization and even
refinement among the Cherokees, and wherever
the fragments of tribes have become possessed of
As with the whites in
property individually.
sparsely settled, or isolated neighborhoods, even
these have more or less barbarity of manners ; but
in the Indian Territory the population as a whole
will compare favorably with that of the Smoky
Mountains of Tennessee, or spots in the hill
country of North Carolina, West Virginia, or
Kentucky. As railroads extend through the lat
ter sections, the character of the people changes ;
and railways, from the intercourse they create,
may be looked upon as a great factor of civiliza
tion in the Indian tribes.
But the true mode to treat the Indian is to

SKELETON ESSAYS.

121

throw him on his own resources, by giving him
his property in severalty, and extending to him,
after the same term of probation needed by any
The vulgar
other alien, the rights of citizenship,
"
proverb — " Root, hog, or die ! teaches a lesson.
He will march into civilized life through the gate
of cattle-raising, wherein the nations of the old
world entered. He will soon learn the value of
money; and a greed of gain, which is not quite
With this will come the
avarice, will seize him.
need of the comforts and even the luxuries of his
neighbors. There will be no scope for barbaric
vices ; and those of civilization, which he will un
fortunately copy, will bring in their train some of
its virtues.
Whether the intellectual capacity of the Indian
can be cultivated- up to the American standard,
may be as yet a debatable question. But that the
brain of the red man is quite equal, if not supe
rior, to that of the Negro or the Mongol, is evi
dent A capacity for eloquence, for bold thoughts
and fervent expressions, has been again and
again proven ; and he has shown himself, time
and again, a rude but a keen diplomatist.
That
he has the material for the mechanical arts, has
been conclusively demonstrated, and the aptitude
with which the Navajoes, and most of the pueblo
Indians show for the creation of textile fabrics,
and for the preparation of leather, has been a mar
vel to travelers. Let him be thrown upon his

SKELETON ESSAYS.

122

own resources, no longer petted by the govern
ment and plundered by its agents, and Mr. Lo
will cease to trouble.
inforcement of these points consult the History of
Pontiac; the accounts of the early settlement of the West;

[In

of

Ives's Reports on the Exploration

lin's Works, and other authorities.

the Colorado ; Cat-

)

PATRIOTISM OR SELF-LOVE-WHICH?

Patriotism, or love of our native land, is sup
posed to be a sentiment inherent in the human
mind.

This may be doubted.

It

is a feeling

mainly arising from association — a mere inhabitiveness, and is shared by nearly all animals.
Neither man nor cats have any remembrance of
their birth, but both show attachment to the
place where they were bred. This is evidently
because they have become familiar with, and
therefore attached to, their surroundings.
A cat will re
The feeling can be transferred.
turn to her old home; but if transported in such a
mode that she cannot trace her way back, will
transfer her attachment to the new place, and will
return there if she be taken away.
A man will transfer his allegiance in the same
manner. At first he will feel some home-sickness,
and will make comparisons between the old and
new residence, greatly to the disadvantage of the
latter. The skies are bluer, the grass greener,

SKELETON ESSAYS.

123

is

it

if

is

;

if

;

if

if

if

is

is

?

?

a

is

is

is

it

is

if

it,

the water purer in the old home than in the new.
The strange people have less to admire in their
habits, manners and actions than those he left
behind. But in time he finds that the country in
which he lives grows better, he fits into
and
after some years,
he visit his birthplace, he
disgusted with its ways, and declares
changed
since his time. But the change
in him. The
new land has grown into him, and his patriotism
transferred.
The question interposes itself here,
patriotism
Does not its active
love of country at all
expression arise from wounded self-love
We do not oppose the invader so much because
we love our surroundings, as that he disturbs
ours, and meddles with us, and wounds
what
our vanity thereby. We resent a reproach thrown
ours, and the
on our country because the place
reproach affects us.
In the same way, the citizen of a distant city,
though a fellow countryman, speak slightingly
of the town in which we live, we repel indignantly
an attack which is, in our thought, aimed at
the Briton sneer at
our pride. We are roused
we reside
the United States we are offended,
a New Yorker assume a lofty
in Philadelphia,
and the Philadelsense of superior advantage
up in
phian who resides in what was Southwark
arms
the resident of what was the old city speak
disparagingly of the former. Nay, even goes far

SKELETON ESSAYS.

124

and A., living in a back alley, glares vengefully at B., if he assume state because of the front
street wherein he dwells.
Patriotism is frequently the pride of possession.
A man fights for his country as he will for his
household goods, his wife, his children, his ox, his
He is defending his
ass, or anything that is his.
own, asserting his proprietorship, and repelling
that invasion of his rights which wounds his selflove.
And patriotism is stimulated differently
with different people. An Englishman loves his
country as well as a Frenchman, but from a dif
The Englishman thinks
ferent point of view.
England is the greatest country in the world be
The Frenchman thinks
cause it is his country.
he is great because he belongs to France. The
one confers, the other receives.
The American
is a curious compound of both, with the English
sentiment predominating.
His country is the
greatest, the freest and the best, of itself. But
then it ought to be, since he himself is the great
est, freest and best of all. He confers and obtains.
It is a case of mutual benefit in the relationship.
But, after all, there is a great deal of sham
about the exhibition of patriotism ; much of it is
in name alone — a mere mask for ambition, for the
gratification of vanity, or as a means for public
The noisy demagogue, the restless
plunder.
meddler, and the thirsty for the wonder of his fel
without feeling its inspiration.
lows, assume
;

it,

ther

SKELETON ESSAYS.

123

Now and then, we have one who, loving the land
that protects him, its freedom, its progress and
its grandeur, is ready to sacrifice his energy, his
strength, and if need be' his life to advance the
prosperity and defend the honor of his country.
One such patriot restores our confidence in human
nature, and creates others, if not so sincere, yet
oftener as earnest, through the mere contagion of
his example.

WHY ARE SO MANY POOR?

That the rich are the thousands, and the poor,
the millions, seems natural enough when we re
flect that there is just a small amount of wealth
per head in the country, and that superior means,
better-directed
skillful thrift, artful
industry,
trickery, or knavish combination — sometimes two
or more of these — concentrates property in few
hands, and leaves the many in want. But poverty
is comparative.
The man who has enough for
his needs, and a very small surplus in store for
There are millions who
contingencies, is rich.
have not enough for their needs, whose whole ex
istence is passed in a dreary struggle with the
wolf at the door, who live in want and die in
Why?
misery.
We are told that, as a rule, the very poor are
very improvident, and prone to expend their
scanty earnings as a matter of whim, with no

126

SKELETON ESSAYS.

regard to the future. Doubtless this is true, and
it is upon the principle that a wretch, in utter
despair, will endeavor to drown his present sor
row in drink, though he" knows in the end it will
intensify his misery. Seeing no hope of bettering
his condition, he becomes reckless.
An inspection of the records of the savings
banks, or the office of the Register of Deeds, will
show thousands who have begun with trifling
savings, and ended the possessors of snug sums,
or of a house of their own, ultimately all paid for.
Where there is hope, desire is intensified. The
possession of a little whets the appetite for more.
Once out of the fetters of debt, and with five dol
lars beyond his needs, the poor man bends all
But when no such
his energies to accumulation.
basis for action exists, he becomes reckless, and
his improvidence assumes a chronic form.
Inadequate compensation for labor is set down
But compensa
as the cause of much poverty.
A man who barely earns six
tion is comparative.
dollars per week, and keeps his expenditure
within five, is well compensated ; and he who
earns twelve, and is obliged to expend fourteen,
He gets in debt,
has no compensation at all.
with all its misery and makeshifts. Then the
mechanic who gets his dollar and a half per day,
in a rural district, where food is cheap, apparel
coarse without a loss of respectability, and rent
trifling, is better rewarded for his toil, than his

SKELETON ESSAYS.

127

fellow in the city, where food is high, requisite
clothing costly, and rent enormous. It is not the
amount received, but its purchasing quality that
Some men have no thrift, and an increase
tells.
of income means a greater proportionate increase
of real or fancied wants. That our toilers are often
badly paid, is true; but that is only one of many
causes

and

may

be neutralized

economy.
Many assume that the cause

somewhat by

of so much pov

erty in the masses is because of some defect in
the form of government or its administration, and
upon the ground that it is a disease of the bodypolitic.

We have all kinds of political quacks

thrusting their nostrums at us, and each recom
mending his own. Some aver it would be all
right, if we had but one legislative body to act
with an unchecked will.
Others assert that there
would be no poor if we had no single President or
Governor, but the executive power lodged in a
committee, on which the proposer, of course, pro
Another holds that poverty would
poses to sit.
vanish if real estate alone were subject to tax
ation, and the possessor of personal property,
though it amounted to millions, were exempted
from all contribution to the public treasury.
It never seems to have occurred to these
observers that we, as a people, are following neces
sarily in the footsteps of other peoples, who rose
in the past, became powerful, and then decayed.

128

SKELETON ESSAYS.

When our forefathers settled this country, there
were few among them who were rich, and very

As we advanced
few who were absolutely poor.
in population, however, we advanced in wealth,
and wealth became less evenly distributed.

When we drifted into a sectional war, at an ex
penditure of several thousands of millions, the
colossal sum expended afforded too rich a plun

Of this vast amount
der-mine to be overlooked.
much was absorbed by contractors and others,
and great fortunes to the favored few arose in a
Before the war there were few millionaires;
day.
after the war their name was legion.
The immense railway interests, which belted
and cross-belted the country with costly channels
of communication, aggrandized the few at the ex
pense of the many. The great owners of these
stocks combined to crush out the others, and the
combination succeeded. A very few obtained col
ossal wealth, and their possessions are such as in
the early days of the republic would have been
accounted fabulous. To such an extreme has this
grown, that the possessor of a million is only
considered to be in easy circumstances, and the
man with a hundred thousand has his slumbers
disturbed by dreams of the alms-house.
The concentration of the greater part of wealth
in the hands of a few, leaves less to be distributed
among the remainder, and poverty becomes the
rule, with competence the exception.

V

SKELETON ESSAYS.
Stock-gambling, now pursued with

129

a ferocity

of

greed, is another mode to give great gains to a
small number, and further impoverish the mass.

Combinations of capital under the names of syn
dicates and trusts, are also used to the same
general end. Not contented with depressing the
condition of the toiler by the power of capital,
they import hordes of half-starved workers from
abroad to lessen the demand for labor, and lower
its compensation.
The wonder is, not that so
many are poor, but that there are still those who
are able to earn a proper living.
The day of an equable distribution of riches in
this country is past, and can not return. We
have to go through the experience of the Roman
empire, and see the country wax great and
powerful, with luxury in the palace and misery in
the cot. Then will follow national decay. Our
old simplicity can never be restored, the more so
that invention and energy have made what for
merly was comfort, a necessity now, and created
wants that are the foes to thrift. All that can
be done is to set some limits to the acquisition of
wealth, or rather limit the amount to be acquired.
[Consult Gibbon's Decline and Fall of
Empire. George's Progress and Poverty.]

the Roman

SKELETON ESSAYS.

180

SHALL THE TRADES DIE OUT?

It

is notorious that American skilled mechanics

as they die are not replaced

by equally skilled

Americans, but by importations from abroad. And
yet the genius of the American man is decidedly
mechanical.
The question as to whether trades
shall die out in this country, would seem at first
At all
glance to be answered in the affirmative.
events, if they do not entirely die, they will at
least survive in a crippled condition, and for this
result there are a number of evident reasons.
The death of the old apprenticeship system is
one of the most prominent causes of the deteriora
tion of the men, while the invention of machinery
for certain work, and the division of mechanical
energy, have destroyed the dignity of the trades
themselves.

The old apprentice became part of the master's
family. The master stood in lieu of the parent,
and was- bound not only to thoroughly instruct
the apprentice in the art and mystery of the craft,
but to look after his material and moral well-

being. Sufficient time was allotted for learning
everything of the trade. Frequently a premium
was given with the boy, for the whole mystery
was thought to be well worth paying for. This is
all changed. The apprentice is taken for what
can be made out of him, and he expects payment
for imperfect services. He is no longer a neo

SKELETON ESSAYS.

131

phyte awaiting instruction, but a mere hireling.
He is no longer a part of the family, but an alien.
Between the lax restraint of home, and the lack
of control of the master, he grows up untended.
The result is that the fine old dignified mechanic,
one of the noblest of characters, has become ex
tinct, except the few fossils of the past.
Machinery has replaced very much the old hand
work, and with it comes the division of labor, and
Formerly the
consequent needlessness of skill.
shoemaker made the shoe or boot, from the cut
ting out of the leather down to polishing the
heel. Now the machine sews under theguidance
of one man ; it lasts under another ; it heels
under a third, and so on.
The carpenter used to plane boards, but the
man and the jack-plane have given away to the
planing machine. They saw, they mortise, and
Sash-perform all other details by machinery.
making, door-making and all that, become dis
tinct callings. A saddler knows nothing now
about making harness ; a harness maker nothing
about saddles. There are ten trades where one
used to exist, and few require more than a brief
training. The mechanic is no longer a skilled
artisan, but a hewer of wood and a drawer of
water.
Of course, in the rural districts, where trans
portation of prepared material is difficult, skilled
men of the building trades will always be in de

132

SKELETON ESSAYS.

But in most other branches of industry,
the skill of the handicraftsman gives way to the
rigid exactitude of the machine. Nails ceased to
mand.

be hand-fashioned

years ago ; but before them
the wool-card.
Pins are made by a machine,
and not only made, but counted and papered,
ready for use. All the parts of a watch are
made, and each so exactly like its fellow, that
a lost part can be replaced without measure
ment or calculation.
So much is produced by
die work, and by appliances of certainty, that the
only skill required is that of putting work to
gether. And when the parts are all of the same
kind, that sort of skill requires no set apprentice
Some trades, indeed,
ship, and little practice.
like the old periwig-makers, threaten to die out.
It is true that this state of affairs does not pre
vail to the same extent in the old world. Skill
is more in demand there than here, and the use of
labor-saving machinery has been retarded by the
obstinacy of the workmen. We shall be able to
draw skill for awhile from that quarter. But the
same results will come there a little later, and
then we shall have no place from which to im
About that time, possibly
port skilled workmen.
machinery may have reached to that pitch, that
every object of manufacture will be made through
out like a pin, with merely the human machine
to turn a crank, or tend the furnace of the steamengine.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

133

THE AMERICAN BOURGEOISIE.

In France the term "bourgeoisie"

not
alone comprehend the bourgeois, or tradesman
class. It is not alone the shop-keeping element,
but something more. It means that portion of
society which produces nothing, and consumes
only what its individual needs require, — that
preys alike on the producer and consumer to
gain its profits from both. Among the toilers
there is a sentiment of patriotism along with the
natural desire to better their condition.
Among
the nobles and gentlemen who have inherited
wealth there is the same patriotic feeling mingled
with a jealous opposition to anything that perils
their social supremacy, and their allegiance to
their own order. The one is naturally democratic
in its leanings and acts ; the other naturally aristo
cratic. But the patriotism of the bourgeoisie,
the traders, the bankers, and the money lords, is
mingled with a greed of gain which is essentially
sordid, and stops at nothing, however questiona
ble, that will add to its hoards. It is naturally
plutocratic, and its ideal of government is that of
does

the purse.

We have the same element here, and it is more
dangerous than it can possibly be under a
monarchy, or even under that form of government
which in France is called a republic, and which

134

SKELETON ESSAYS.

is the mere temporary
changers with the mob.

alliance of the money
Here it monopolizes the

the 'Change, raises or depresses fictitious values
of securities ; controls the great railway and tel
egraph lines ; owns the State legislatures ; has
its attorneys in both houses of Congress, and in
fuses corruption into the whole body politic.
It
disdains petty gains, and counts its profits by the
millions — none of this legitimate gain, but stolen
from the mass, whose earnings it abridges, and
whose necessaries of life it taxes to the utmost.
Yet, as some one has called Russia, " a des
potism tempered by assassination, "so, in spite of
the power of the bourgeoisie, this country is be
coming "a plutocracy tempered by the ballot".
It is true that there is a large part of the voters,
more in the cities and towns, and less in the rural
districts, who vote as they are paid, and barter
the most precious heritage of freeman for a mess
of very poor pottage. It is true that there are a
still larger part who vote without reflection, or are
guided by prejudice or passion. But it is equally
true that there is a large part, growing contin
ually in numbers, that use the ballot intelligently,
and hold the balance of power in the contest of
parties, or in the struggle between the bourgeoisie
and the people.
It is to these we must look to
restrain the arrogance of capital, to limit it within
its just rights, and curb its encroachment.
It must not be supposed that this element of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

135

the bourgeoisie

is peculiar to this, or to any
modern country. It will be found to have existed

in the olden republics and empires, and to have
been one of the main causes, the leading one, in
truth, of their downfall, as a brief summary of
the facts will show.
[For

the purpose of demonstrating this position consult

Mommsen's History of Rome, Grote's Greece, Sismendi's
Italian Republics, Gibbon's Decline and Fall, and the ar
ticle, "Venice," in either of the standard Encyclopedias.

A

may be readily drawn between the
money-making schemes and the money-making men of
comparison

the olden time, with the methods existing now, and the
effects of the old combinations upon the character and
fortunes of the countries in which they existed.]

It will

thus be seen that while our modern
bourgeoisie is no new thing, its power for evil is
increased by the gigantic operations of modern
times, and the many inventions and processes
which avarice uses for its ends; while to combat
it requires even more vigilance and energy than
was needed in the past.

THE ELEMENTS OF GOLD.

The chemists tell us that gold is

a simple sub

stance, an element which can not be reduced to
two or more substances. The philosopher, how
ever, who looks beyond the surface, and studies
effects in order to trace them up to causes, will

SKELETON ESSAYS.

136

see that this seeming element is made up

of var

ious parts, and that these can be traced and de
fined with a certain amount of precision.
The first element is blood. The conquest of
Mexico and Peru, the subjugation of India, the
history of the world everywhere, shows how
essential this element is to the perfection of gold.
[Consult and draw illustrations

from Heap's Spanish

Conquest, Robertson's South America, Prescott's Mex
ico, and the speeches of Burke and Sheridan at the im
peachment of Warren Hastings.]

Another element is crime. There is not a bur
glary, a fraud, a forgery or a robbery, which does
not furnish its share to the creation of gold.
A third element is meanness. The avarice of
the miser, the grasping greed of the trusts, mak
ing their enormous gains from the cent or even
the half-cent daily of the toiling millions, prove
the need of this element in order to give gold its
character.

Another element is falsehood.

There is no lie
so base as to be shunned by the maker of gold.
The false reports that raise or depress the stock
market, the impudently untrue statements of the
party press, the assumption of piety as a cloak to
villainy, all these are essential to the making of
gold.
[There are other elements, tears, sorrows, the hunger of
toilers, the misery of the defrauded, &c, which can be
worked up by the writer.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.
CITY

versus

137

COUNTRY.

Men talk of the beauties of a rural life. As a
pendant to luxurious living in the city, it will do

to boast of. A splendid country-seat, with a
magnificent country mansion, well-filled stables,
fine drives and riding paths, a dozen trained ser
vants, a skilled French cook with a staff of assist
ants, and hosts of genial guests, will make coun
try life even more than endurable for two months
or even three of the year.
But this is not what
people mean when they talk of the country.
They mean the country life of the poor, or at best
of the thrifty farmer.
And what is the farmer's life in the country ?
A lot of persistent and unrelieved toil. " Early
to bed and early to rise," and all but the time
spent between the sheets devoted to continuous
hard work for scanty and precarious gain. All
the household comforts of the city, water, gas,
furnace-heating, choice of an infinite variety of
food — these are denied the rural dwellers. To
indulge in such things would be an extravagance
leading to ruin.
Men talk of the fresh air of the country.
But
it is only to be had during the day, and then only
at a distance from the dwelling-house.
The

farmer generally looks upon the muck-heap as a
gold mine, and he is right from an economic point
of view. He loves it so that he must locate it

SKELETON ESSAYS.

138

a

is

it

a

?

is

is

a

is

it,

near his house, and the exhalations from putre
scent vegetable matter, not only furnish a
stench for the nostrils, but a malaria which per
vades the dwelling and saps health and strength.
From
and from another domestic source, comes
the drainage which pollutes the well.
And to
counterbalance the advantages of the open air,
a fear of the atmosphere at night which
an in
herent prejudice of the rural dweller, causes him
to sleep in closed chambers, where his breath
charges the space around him with poisonous
carbonic dioxide — temporary blackhole of Cal
cutta.
The windows of the average country
house will neither go up, nor be let down, easily.
He
unacquainted with wire screens and their
uses, and
consequently the prey to the fero
cious mosquito.
What amusements enliven his life
Almost
visit to church twice on
literally none, beyond
Sundays, where he discusses politics or makes
horse-trades in the wagon-shed previous to ser
He
vice, or naps placidly through the sermon.
has no theatre, no concerts, no lectures — no social
true, he has
calls of evenings. Once a year,
the intellectual treat of bare-back riding at the
year
traveling circus, and twice or four times
at most, the delights of the county court, where

?

is

if

lucky he may serve on the grand jury. Beyond
one continued grind.
these the rural life
Few, and only
And then, what are the gains

SKELETOX ESSAYS.

189

a cash return.

As for clothes,

is

they meet

it

is

it

it,

to be had by denying himself and family com
forts, and living and doing in a mean and sordid
way. The butter goes to market — he cannot af
ford to eat
at the price
brings in the city.
Butcher's meat a rarity, and the fowls go where

a

a

enough that they cover him, and when they will
no more hold together can be utilised as
scare
crow in the corn field. And the uncertainty of
the crops. Rains on one hand and drought on
the other, rust, blight, mildew, worms, caterpillars
host of insect enemies, all these come to
and
baffle the rural dweller, none of which assail the

city

man.

[Roosevelt's Five Acres Enough

will afford useful

S.

hints to the writer, and the essays of the entomologists
Patent Office Reports will give others.]
in the U.

COUNTRY versus CITY.

That the rich, who can maintain their tall

is

is

palaces in the city, furnished with all the appli
ances of luxury, and crowded with supple flun
kies, should look upon rural life only as an
incident, not surprising. That the toiling masses
remain there, living in inconvenient houses,
the necessity of their
or portions of houses,
labor, which they can only find there. But that

140

SKELETON ESSAYS.

those who are bred in the country, flock to
crowded cities, and to a life so different to that in
which they have been trained, can not be readily
accounted for except on the basis of infatuation.
The population of the condensed communities
receives large accessions yearly from among the
farmer's sons and daughters, all under the spell
of that fascination embodied in the French peas
"
ant's saying — See Paris, and then die".
Something is due to ambition, and the desire to
make a name, or acquire a fortune. And yet it is
but an unreasoning ambition. The young man
who is looked upon in the village, or the rural
district, as a being of phenomenal smartness,
plunges into the crowded city, expecting to float
grandly, and in ninety-nine cases out of a hun
dred, is lost in the current. At home, he had a
local distinction, or was in a fair way to achieve it.
" Among the blind, the one-eyed man is king."
But among those who have perfect vision, the
one-eyed man is only an object of pity.
Another cause of the rural exodus is the unrestfulness of many natures, who pine in the quiet of
the country, and think their active nature has no
scope for it,s exercise until it comes in contact and
enters into competition with those of a similar
It is an error that is soon found
constitution.
out, and often grievously atoned for.
Many fail,
and their social and moral wrecks are strewn
around. A few succeed ; but of these the greater

SKELETON ESSAYS.

141

;

is

;

is

is

;

it,
is

part purchase success with the loss of health,
happiness and content.
It is true that there is continual amusement at
first to the rural comer. The bustle, whirl and
din of the streets, the theatres, and the sights free
or paid for — especially those which cost him
nothing ; the constant excitement of city life,
take some time before they pall upon him. He
does not miss the old rural scenery. Accustomed
to it from his birth it never had attraction for
him. Like the air he breathed, he never stopped
to examine it. But the health that came from
"the pure air, the pure water, and the out door life,
with its sense of independence, if he should not
sure to tell on him, and nature revenges
miss
the change in her surroundings.
Men tell us that the rural dweller invariably
that he lacks the
makes his house uncomfortable
conveniences of city life as well as its comforts.
But the humblest hut in the country preferable
to the tenement-dens of the large cities, where
men, women and children are packed together,
mingled with the
generating foul air, which
stenches of the kennel. The rich, or those fairly
well off, do not so suffer but these can have com
the poor
forts in country, as well as city. It
who will find the country preferable, morally,
socially, and in the end pecuniarily. If their gains
and industry, economy
foe less, they are surer
and thrift reap more certain rewards in the coun

SKELETON ESSAYS.

142

try than they do in the city, where rent, fuel and
food are dearer, and take off a greater percentage
from the gross earnings.
[The life of

the city mechanic

or laborer, compared

with that of his fellow in the country, may be given in
detail, and tables of comparative longevity, rural and ur
ban,

with the respective

death-rates,

may be

used with

effect.]

LITTLE BOOKS.

At

the beginning of printing, folios and quar
tos were the rule, and even octavos the excep
tion, while a duodecimo was rarely seen. This
was because men were accustomed to the manu
scripts engrossed upon sheets of parchment.
The type was usually large, and the pages orna
mented by more or less illumination. Books
were costly, and their use confined to the learned.
The learned were few. The great mass were
ignorant, and too poor, had they been otherwise,
to be book-buyers.
As the mystery of reading became more dif
fused there came a demand for more portable
volumes at a less cost.
Books were no longer
the tools of the learned.
They became vehicles
of amusement as well as of instruction.
The
gestes of the middle ages became the tales of
a later period, and these expanded to the ro
mance.
The appetite grew upon the meat with

SKELETON ESSAYS.
which it was fed.

But

as the

143

lower class became

buyers of literature, literature cheapened to sup
ply the demand.
In process of time it was seen that instruction
was required as well as amusement, and instruc
Hence came the
tion in a rudimentary form.
minor text-books, the abridgments and the
manuals. They came to remain, for the world
will not do without them. Then it became profit
able to cull the best flowers of fancy, and the
most salient points of science, and to make selec
tions and collections for those who had neither
time nor inclination to wade through numberless
volumes, and who preferred superficial knowl
Larger works are still
edge to none at all.
printed, but their readers are comparatively few.
Smaller ones are issued in almost countless num
bers, and the name of their readers is legion.
Jumping too quickly to conclusions, many have
asserted that these smaller works are the bane
of learning, and that they disseminate shallow
knowledge. Granted; and yet it is not for the
Facts that
well-wisher of his kind to complain.
would be otherwise confined to a few, are im
pressed upon the general mind, and every now
and then, some one is stimulated thereby to closer
study, and given a thirst for the acquisition of
knowledge that would not otherwise exist. Small
books are the primers of science, art, history, and
all the varieties of knowledge.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

H4

It

to note how vast is the
circulation of these little missionaries of informa
tion. They are printed by millions, and added
to them in many millions more are the magazines
and journals, which are only little books of daily,
They contain an
weekly, or monthly issue.
enormous amount of knowledge, in almost infi
nite variety, and they produce an amount of
human happiness and comfort not to be calculated.
The increased postal facilities of the country, and
the ease and certainty with which printed matter
can be transmitted to remote sections, have in
creased the circulation of these small books, until
there is scarcely a cottage without its book-shelf,
and scarcely a family without these silent com
panions. Some of the ablest authors and schol
ars of the country have bent their talents and
learning to the writing and compiling of little
books, and publishers find profit in catering for a
demand which has grown wonderfully in the
past, and is destined to greater growth in the
is simply wonderful

future.
[Consult D'Israeli's Curiosities of Literature, and
various Bibliographical treatises for information needed
for an expansion of the theme.]

\

SKELETON E8SAY8.

146

MANLY CHARACTER.

Character and reputation are two distinct
things, though usually confounded ; for a man may
have a strong character, whether his reputation be
good or bad ; and with a bad character may have
Character shows what we
a good reputation.
are, and reputation what others think of us. It
is very pleasant to have a good reputation ; it
pleases our vanity that the world should think
well of us ; we are sensitive to the slightest breath
of slander ; but life is so short, and the hereafter
so endless, that the object should be mainly to
fix and determine our individual character, and
mainly to let reputation vindicate itself, as it is
sure to do sooner or later if the conduct be right.
Many men have the reputation of being " good
fellows", " clever fellows," "good-hearted," and
all that, who are lacking in most, if not all, of the
elements of manly character.
Boldness for right characterizes the perfect
man. Yet it is so often lacking that its presence
excites wonder, and often ill-will.
A. and B. meet C. with a crowd; and C. accuses
D., who is absent, of various peccadillos. After
C. and the crowd have left, A. says to B., " He
shouldn't talk of D. so, for I know that his
charges are not true." " Well," quoth B., " why didn't you say so in
the presence of all those fellows."

140

SKELETON E88AT8.

" Oh, it isn't my affair, you know. Why should
I get ill will on D.'s account ?"
Yet had A. seen C. putting his fingers in D.'s
money-drawer, he would have raised an outcry
and summoned the police. He is silent while C.
is committing a worse larceny, pilfering D.'s
reputation.
In the first case, there was danger of a quarrel,
In the
and the loss of worthless friendship.
second he would have the aid of the police, and
Here is a lack
be applauded by good citizens.
of moral courage in the character, blunting the
sense of right and the dictates of duty.
Frankness is another element of manly char
acter which is frequently absent in men who have
A man may tell
a reputation for truthfulness.
the truth when it is required, and yet not be frank.
He tells all the truth, and yet suffers falsehood to
triumph without exposing it. This is sometimes
through lack of moral courage, but oftener from
a lack of frankness, and frequently through mental
inability to distinguish between meddlesomeness
and a proper care for the right, for the reputation
and the good of our neighbor, both as an in
dividual, and a member of the community.
The opposite defect in character is excess of
frankness without judgment, and accompanied by
meddlesomeness and officiousness. Frankness
and truth have to be regulated by prudence and
kindness, in order to prevent their degenerating

SKELETON ESSAYS.
into brutality.

For instance, P.,

147

a hard working

German, went in the woods after some bags of
leaves to use as bedding for his horses, using a
light wagon for the purpose. The horse, stung
by bees, ran away. Poor F. was thrown out, his
skull fractured and neck broken, killing him in
A neighbor was sent, and told to break
stantly.
the news cautiously to his wife.
He went accord
"
ingly, and said — Oh ! Mrs. F., your husband
has been thrown out of his wagon, and killed ".
The poor woman looked at him, and mur
mured — " Is he much hurt ?"
" Hurt ! Why, I tell you he is dead."
Mrs. F. was seized with the pangs of prema
ture labor, and in a week's time had died. The
neighbor's excuse was that he only told the
truth, that she would have to know anyhow.
Here, perhaps, was a lack of thought only.
of it which avoids mean
courage in defence of the weak

[Honor, and that keen
ness and little things
against

the strong

vindication

;

;

sense

patience under injury, and quick
self-respect, combined with
sustaining the right of all men to

against insult

a respect for others

;

;

express their opinions, while firmly but mildly resisting
error; kindness of action ; courtesy of demeanor and

words without degenerating into flattery or fawning ;
all these may be taken up, discussed and enlarged u| on
as part of the elements of character. Consult the treatises
of Adam Brown, Hamilton, Upham, Combe and others
on Mental Philosophy.]
y

148

SKELETON ESSAYS.
FAME.

With the mass, fame is merely local distin

A man with them is famous,
guished reputation.
not because he is recognized by the world as pos
sessed of certain great qualities in larger amount
than other men, or as having achieved some
great success, or worked some pre-eminent good,
but since he has surpassed the men of the vici
nage in some feat of physical strength or dex
terity. When a man's name rings from one end
of the country to the other, and is in the mouths
of every one, this notoriety is often confounded
with fame.
It is difficult to define fame precisely. There
is a local fame, where a man is known favorably
to a municipality, a section, or a State ; and the
general fame, which brings his name and deeds
as objects of admiration before the greater part
of the civilized world. Few attain the latter,
and fewer retain it. The idol of to-day is thrown
from his pedestal to-morrow, and, if he escape
being split and burned, and his ashes scattered,
remains where he falls, and is speedily overgrown
with weeds and briars.
Julius Caesar rose to the height of fame, and
held his high renown for centuries. With the
classicists he stands foremost among the great
generals of the world, and ranks high as a
scholar. The great mass of the people have a

SKELETON ESSAYS.

149

notion of him as a bald-headed gentleman who
wore no wig, and whose name is given to dogs and
slaves.
Even Napoleon, near our own time, has lost
much of the lustre that surrounded his name.
He is looked at as a gentleman in an overcoat,
rather fat, without heart or honor, who lost all his
assumed dignity in his island jail, and quarreled
with his keeper.
Washington retains his position — long may he
do it ! but his fame rests more upon his self abne
gation than his action, and he is considered to be
greater for what he refused to be, than for what
he was.

Fame rarely gets over local limits, unless the
man be famous because he was a scourge of man
kind. Few poets are known beyond their own
countries. Shakespeare, Byron and Burns are ex

ceptions ; — the second because he appealed to
passions and frailties ; the last because he touched
with a master hand the chords of everyday emo
tions, and the first because he was master of every
sentiment and feeling in the human heart. But
there are few others in any country whose repu
tation has become general. Turn to the literature
of Sweden. The folk-ballads of that country have
been translated into English and German; our
literary students are familiar with Tegner, prin
cipally through Longfellow's rendition of parts
of Frithiof's Saga ; but who has heard here of

SKELETON ESSAT3.

150

Ibsen, the greatest of all the Northern poets ?
His name is a novelty to the average English
and American reader.

Nor within our own country are our literary
men known to the masses.
"What do you think
of Longfellow ?" Inquire of a famous jockey.
" Longfellow ", is the reply, " he was one of
!

best and greatest horses on the turf."
" Oh, I mean Longfellow, the poet ? "
"Well, I don't know. I never heard of him."
" Don't you know anything about the
poets,

then?"

bet I do. There's Bill Carleton, Peleg
Arkwright, and the chap, I forget his name, that
wrote ' Ostler Joe.' Them fellows is three lengths
ahead of the others, but I don't know Longfellow
and the crowd that 'aint placed."
There are a few whose fame survives, and
seems perennial ; but it came to them when they
had no use for it.
Burns died a pauper, almost in absolute want.
To-day his songs are translated into every lan
guage and read in every civilized country, and
his pithy quotations are used as aphorisms by
statesmen and sages.
The tinker Bunyan, the despised Rommany
chal, inmate of prisons and persecuted of booby
squires, never knew that his immortal Pilgrim
would make his progress through a dozen lands,
"
and have his " Progress printed by millions.

"You

SKELETON ESSATB.

151

Goldsmith is famous now ; he was laughed at
or pitied in his day, and thought to be common
place and vulgar by the mass.
DeFoe, standing in the pillory, did not dream
that his " Robinson Crusoe" was destined to co
exist with the language.
Much of fame is ill-fame, and the name often
lives longest which is most infamous.
[Consult Roscoe's Leo X, Mommsen's and Niebuhr's
Rome, Gibbon's Decline and Fall, Crowe's History of
France, Lamartine's Girondists, Walpole's Historical
Doubts, and Thiers's Consulate and Empire, in order to
show among those who have ill-fame in history deserve,
and how many do not, the obloquy under which they
labor.]

The man who pursues the duty of life faith
fully, and does the best for his family and neigh
bors, is happier while he lives than the seeker
for fame, and may chance to occupy as large a
niche in history as nine out of ten of his neigh
bors who are itching to have their names enrolled
favorably on the record.

FIELD SPORTS.

The old field-sports of which we read have
been modified very much in modern times, and
some of them have only a precarious existence.
In the old days the fox-hunting squire rode

153

SKELETON ESSAYS.

straight to hounds, no matter how high the
hedge or how deep the ditch in his way ; bore
home the brush, if he got it, in triumph, and then,
after the hunt, dropped on the floor amid his
boon companions, with from three to four bottles
of wine under his belt. Then there were gentle
men jockeys, who rode their own horses, and
disdained foul play. Now, fox-hunting maintains
a feeble existence in England and Ireland, and
exists in a kind of mockery in parts of Virginia,
and around New York City, where, two or three
times a year, they chase the anise-bag or a mis
erable captive Reynard let loose, and where they
are mostly prudent enough to ride for safety.
Horse-racing still survives here and in Eng
land ; it has even got a hold by sufferance in
France among a few Anglomaniacs who affect
"
interest in " bouldogues
and an appetite for
" bifstek ". But racing has ceased to be a fieldsport, and has become an out-door gaming-house ;
and field sports, properly so-called, have changed
their character, preparatory to dying out alto
gether, so far as their old spirit and purpose are
concerned.
The old fox-hunting began in the laudable pur
pose of exterminating vermin ; but when the
objects of the chase became scarcer, it was con
tinued as an exciting though dangerous sport,
calling for exhilarating exercise, and acting as an
excuse for a carouse. But the farmer is not so

SKELETON ESSAYS.

158

fond as he was of having his grainfields trampled
upon, and vermin encouraged to breed and prey
The race of three-bottle men
upon his poultry.
in England has died out.
It is no longer con
sidered good form to get drunk in company.
In this country it was always an exotic.
The
old Virginian, in the ante-revolutionary days,
thought its existence to be necessary as an asser
tion of the rights of country gentlemen ; but he
thinks differently now. The few hunts attempted
near New York City, because they are " so
English, you know ", are farces.
The main object of racing should be the im
provement of the swiftness and endurance of a
quadruped who is man's most useful servant Of
course, amusement to the participants was, and
always will be, the sustaining power, but the
improvement of the breed of horses should be
the underlying motive. So long as this was the
case, racing had its advantages ; and though it
is human nature, and especially British and
American nature, to lay wagers on the result on
that as in other matters of competition, betting
The improvement in
was merely an incident.
the breed of horses became marked. The best
blood of Arabia, where horse-rearing had become
excellent in its methods, was imported to be
come the sires of racers, and crosses upon the
Horses
native stock continually improved it.
were run in heats, and for long distances, and

y

154

SKELETON ESSAYS.

bottom as well as speed were looked upon as
essential.
But as racing became a national amusement,
and gamesters became horse-owners and horsebreeders for motives of gain, heat-races were
dropped in England, and short dashes substituted.
Speed has increased thereby, but bottom has de
The stock of roadsters and hunters has
creased.
In this country, it is only of late
deteriorated.
years that we have followed the pernicious
We have in
change with slavish imitation.
creased the record for swiftness, but not that for
endurance. Our horses are also set on the track
too early. A large number of them are broken
down before they have fairly reached maturity.
It is true, that we have less need of enduring
saddle-horses than in the past. The locomotive
engine, with its train of cars, has supplanted the
horse for journeying. Horseback-riding, except
in the unsettled parts of the country, where speed
is not essential, and the journeys infrequent, is
now merely for exercise or amusement.
Still it
is to be regretted.
The great improvement in the trotting-horse
in America is a great bar to the improvement of
racers. Men prefer to drive, and not ride. The
speed of some of these trotters is remarkable,
and there is some reason to hope that the time
is coming when the road-horse will cover a mile
in a trot, at the same time that a racer will in a

BKELETOX ESSATS.

155

When that occurs, if ever, the race
course will have received a deadly blow, except
for gaming purposes ; and as the trotting-track
permits the same practices, horse-racing will
only survive in a crippled condition.
Whatever changes may take place in the future,

gallop.

field-sports, with the better purpose beneath them,
have received a deadly blow. They will hence
forth be the pursuits of the black-leg and his
dupe, and be mainly frequented by plungers and
book-makers, with a few who take interest in the
competition of noble animals in a race, without
sense of the cruelty that underlies, and the dis
reputable practices that attend the sport.
[The turf calendars and sporting records will give some
facts as to the genealogy of prominent horses and their
achievements on the turf, that may be worked into an
essay of this kind, and give it additional spice and inter

est]

THRIFT.

Thrift cannot well exist without

a wise econ

omy, yet the two things are different. Thrift
should not be confounded with niggardliness,
which pinches and saves at the sacrifice of com
fort ; for thrift is not inconsistent with judicious
The
and even liberal personal expenditure.
word is sometimes used in the sense of frugality,

SKELETON ESSAYS.

156

as

well

as gain, but its correct definition

is the

prosperity which arises from the proper husband
The amount a man may
ing and use of means.
properly expend upon himself or his family, to
gratify his wants or wishes, or please and serve
his friends, is comparative.
But whatever may
be his income, he is not thrifty unless he confine
his expenditures far within its limits.
The great bar to thrift in this country is the
extravagance of the poor, which was intensified
by the fictitious values created by the papermoney issued during the sectional war, and the
large expenditures necessary for its successful
conduct by the government.
The mechanic ac
customed to receiving a dollar and a half per day
for his labor before, while he obtained double that
amount during the war, looked only to the sum
total of his earnings without observing its pur
chasing power. And its purchasing power was
for the time greater, for as government disbursed
continually and liberally, money was plenty and
well circulated. Thousands of men made for
tunes by shoddy contracts, and spent lavishly to
the temporary benefit of the laboring class. But
only a few of these retained their gains. It was
" come easy and
go easy" with the most. When
the war closed, and we at last got down to a
specie basis by the collapse of the bubble of in
flation, the mass could not accommodate itself to
the altered condition.
Sham had had its day,

SKELETON ESSJLYV.

167

and desired to continue it, but could not. There
had been no economy during the flush times, and
men desired to continue spending up to their
accustomed margin, without regard to their re
duced means.

As with individuals

so with communities. The
aggregate debts owed by the various older mu
nicipalities at the time the war broke out, have

been since increased six-fold, while the popula
tion has scarcely increased fifty per cent. A
great portion of these debts were incurred with
out reason.
Sewers in uninhabited sections,
streets laid out, curbed and flagged through va
cant fields, and other devices to burden the tax
payers, piled up the debt, frequently without any
sinking fund to provide for its extinction. In the
newer cities of mushroom growth this may not
have worked oppressively, since the increase in
the value of real estate, and the inflow of popula
tion, have made the debt per capita reasonable.
But in the older cities, where increase of value
and of population is slow, the steadily accumulat
ing debt has depressed industry and paralyzed

thrift.
Both with individuals and communities, it is
necessary to guide expenditure by rigid rules,
and to obey the laws of economy, if both would
We doubt, however, if this course
be thrifty.
will be followed until it be a thing of necessity.
It will require another commercial and financial

158

SKELETON ESSAT8.

panic — a general crash and a stern settling- day
to bring both individuals and communities down
to a basis of common sense.

MAN

AS A FREE AGENT.

Without looking at free will and predestinarianism in their religious sense, or discussing the
vexed question as to whether man has the power
to act for himself and is responsible for his
actions, or whether his whole course has been
fore-ordained from the beginning, leaving him
without independent will and without responsi
bility, it must be admitted that human action is
greatly warped if not entirely moulded by cir
cumstances, and that man is frequently controlled
by an outside force which he can neither resist
nor evade. The whole experience of a man's life
is, that however well his plans may have been
laid, there was always some modification without
his will, and that frequently the very plans them
selves were begot by circumstances of which he
knew nothing until they occurred.

History is full of instances where the fortunes
of dynasties, the downfall of a people, the course
of empire, the result of a decisive battle, depended
upon trifles which came without the agency of
the leading spirits, or even in defiance of their
will. One of the most remarkable of these is in

BKELETON E8BAYB.

159

the case of Oliver Cromwell. He was about to
emigrate to this country along with others, when
an order in council forbade the ship's departure.
He remained, and assumed the leading part in
affairs.
Had he not remained, Charles the First
might have retained his head, and Blake would
certainly have not laid the foundation of the mari
time supremacy of England.
The English, under
Lord Hay, would have completed the discomfi
ture of the French at Fonteroy, had not the bad
faith of the English in regard to the treaty of
Limerick, so intensified the valor of the Irish
auxiliary, that their desperate valor retrieved the
fortune of the day, and turned defeat into victory.
[Cite from English history the consequences to Richard
the Second of the banishment of the Earl of Derby ; the
turning point at Waterloo from the singular circumstances
that prevented the arrival of Grouchy ; from Romish his
tory, how the well-planned surprise of the barbarians was
by the cackling of the geese ; the series of
events that ended in the overthrow of Antony ; the train
prevented

of circumstances leading to
and

a

the assassination of Caesar,

number of other instances.]

We have several notable instances in our own
'

history where unforseen circumstances of the most
trivial kind changed the current of events at a
critical juncture. The plan for Arnold's transfer of
West Point, which would have been almost, if not
quite, a fatal blow to the revolting colonies, was
frustrated by a train of unexpected circumstances,

160

SKELETON ESSAYS.

Andre not being able to get on the Vulture, and
mistaking the character of the plundering militia
men until too late ; and it was an equally clear
chain of circumstances, beginning with the injus
tice of Congress to Arnold, that led to the defec
tion of the latter ; and the revel at Trenton, by
which Rahl was led impatiently to thrust into his
pocket the written warning that would have pre
vented the surprise by Washington, as well as
the blunders below that broke up the plan of a
general capture of all the posts on the Delaware;
and in our own time, the peculiar series of events
that prevented Lee from securing the heights at
Gettysburg which resulted in his defeat, and gave
the North the decisive battle of the war.
[The writer will find by diligent
enough

instances

search

in history

to expand this essay to any desired

length.]

THE WATER

SUPPLY OF TOWNS.

The question of the supply of water for drink
ing as well as mechanical purposes is becoming,
as population concentrates itself in certain cen
tres, a problem of deep interest.
Without con
sidering the continuous growth of the cities of the
West, the two leading cities of the East, New
York and Philadelphia, should they increase at

SKELETON ESSAYS.

161

anything like the same ratio during the next fifty
years as they have during the past half century,
will exhaust all the water courses above them in
order to supply their needs. New York, with her
suburbs, embracing Brooklyn, Jersey City, Hoboken, Newark, and other rising towns, bid fair
by that time to be the residence of seventeen
millions or more of people, and the Croton, the
Passaic and the other water sheds will be unable
The question
to supply the enormous demand.
then will be upon what reservoir can they draw.
Philadelphia, even with both the Schuylkill and
Delaware to draw from, will be nearly in a simi
lar position. It does not concern us, but it does
our descendants, and it is only prudence and a
proper foresight which leads us to discuss the
question.
The quantity of water per head varies-. It is
more in a manufacturing city than in one of resi
dence mainly ; but it increases in a greater ratio
as the population grows. There are many causes
for this, — street sprinkling, fires, and the waste
and leakage that will occur in spite of all precau
tions. The old assumption of 50 gallons per
head, must at least be doubled. On these data
New York and her suburbs, in 1940, will require
1,700,000,000 gallons of water daily.
This is beyond the capacity of the present

sources of supply. It would drain entirely all the
potable water from the Hudson and its tributaries.

162

SKELETON ESSAYS.

For remember
can be drawn

it is

only potable water

that

upon, and that must come from
brooks and rivulets that are yet unpolluted.
As the country grows, however, villages and
towns grow along these streams, who must have
their own drinking water, and aid by their sewer
age to pollute and so diminish New York's supply.
The daily flow of seventeen hundred millions of
gallons of drinkable water daily, becomes im
possible. It will become necessary therefore to
erect gigantic works to distill fresh from the pol
luted sea-water in New York Bay and beyond
Hell Gate, or to get a supply elsewhere.
Nature has made the great reservoirs for the
cities east of Colorado. They are the lakes from
Superior down.
It will cost no more proportionately to tap
Lake Erie, and lead its waters to New York, than
to bring rock-oil by tubes from the oil-regions.
The supply, added to that of the water-shed of
the Hudson and its tributaries, will be sufficient
for a time beyond which it is needless to extend
our prevision, for all the cities in its route, and
on either side, for miles. It is practically inex
haustible, so long as the country to be furnished
with it does not exceed the density of population
of that of China to-day.
But we should not wait for the increase of pop
ulation.
The work should be begun now. Its
cost is not beyond our means ; the works are

SKELETON ESSAY8.
our ordinary engineering

capacity.
consider the data at our command.

within
us

163

Let

[Consult the various reports of the Croton Aqueduct
Commission, Croes and Howell's report to the Newark
1879, and

Aqueduct

Board,

Aqueducts

to be found

analyses

of

and uses

of

the various

articles

in the encyclopedias.

on

The

by cities may be
used, and further information as to the nature, quality
the

various waters used

water, be found in the

many works upon

Dietetrics, which should be consulted.]

LYING AS A FINE ART.
Deception has of late years not only arisen to
the height of a fine art, but has almost reached
the dignity of a science. It is subdivided, on ac
count of its objects and aims, and in some of its
departments has become subject to fixed rules.
It governs and guides the actions of men, and is
master as well as servant. Truth is said to reside
at the bottom of a well, but seems to love its
dwelling so much as to prefer to stay there, leav
ing the sway of the world to its audacious and
unscrupulous competitor.
The professors of the polite art of falsification
have various departments in which each excels.
They must not be confounded with such pseudoprofessors as Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, Terxiera,
Baron Munchausen, and the author of that popu

SKELETON ESSAYS.

164

lar ballad " The Derby Ram." For the stories of
Pinto have been verified by later travellers, while
the assertions of Teixiera, Munchausen and the
man of the Derby Ram were mere exaggerations,
meant not to deceive, but amuse. The essence
of a lie is deception, and truth may be changed
to falsehood by a little alteration of its garments.
The tales of the German baron and his followers
were meant as mere "bounces" to be laughed
at, not to deceive readers, nor did they deceive
any one. Who ever believed that the cherry
stones shot into a deer's head grew up into fruitbearing trees, or that the Derby Ram measured
five miles from the tip of his nose to the end of
his tail ? Munchausen and the rest gained their
reputation by false pretences, and it is time that
their false claim should be exposed.
The principal departments of lying are : —

I. The Historical.
[Consult Macaulay's History of England for the at
tack on William Penn, and Dixon's work in refutation ;
the ordinary history of Italy, and Roscoe's Leo X.; the
story of the six burghers of Calais in Froissart, and the
modern histories ; Shakespeare's Richard the Third, Halford's Life ot Richard the
torical Doubts

;

Third, and Walpole's His

with Hildr'eth's and Bancroft's Histories

of the United States, and the various numbers of the
American Historical magazines.
Enough examples may
" to point a moral and adorn an —"
be found in these
essay.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.
2.

165

The Gainful.

[In this department it

is unneccessary to consult books.

The writer can draw on his own experience among pro
fessors, from the shopkeeper who assures you that he is

selling below cost, to the broker in Wall street, or the
railway sharp.]
3.

The Political.

[The platforms and campaign documents of the politi
cal parties, and the editorials of the journals, will furnish
a sufficiency of brilliant examples.]

4. The Vindictive.
[Controversial pamphlets may be drawn upon for any

number of instances.]
5. The

Moral.

[Some of the most accomplished professors in this
department may be found recorded in the list of publi
cations of the various societies for improving man's morals,

and bettering his condition.
tains some very clumsy

At

operators,

the same time,

it con

whose work fails to

deceive any one short of an idiot.]

6. The
7.

Philanthropical.

The Religious.

[The professors in

these two departments frequently

Their work is wellrise to the position of perfect artists.
They
planned, and carried out to a beautiful shape.
in their operation with that of
No. 4, and do some very pretty work for the purpose of
loading the other fellows with obloquy.]

are frequently combined

SKELETON ESSAYS.

166

8.

The Motiveless.

[This

a

small but select class, rude in their work as a

Every man has met them, however, and
general thing.
the writer will have no trouble in citing the most promi
nent.]

The ancients cultivated lying, and the Romans
especially arrived at eminence in the art. But
we fancy that they never reached the pitch of
excellence attained at the present day, beyond
which it is impossible to get, and which makes
Satan himself pale with envy.
[Mrs. Opie on Lying, will afford valuable hints in
working up the subject, which might be readily expanded
to an entertaining public lecture. ]

PUBLIC

DEBT.

Public debt is the result of the expenditure of
money in anticipation of revenue acquired by tax
ation, and if prudently incurred, for proper pur
poses, and the money be honestly expended,
with a sufficient sinking fund to ensure its pay
ment at maturity, may be permitted.
Unfortu
nately, such is the nature of most of those who
manage public affairs, that a large part of the
money obtained by borrowing is wasted and falls
into the hands of rogues, the objects for which it
was borrowed are not faithfully carried out, and
the State or City is cheated of the improvement

SKELETON ESSAYS.

167

for which the working masses, the taxpayers of
last resort, have to pay with their toil.
Outside of war, which is an exceptional subject
of expense, the Federal government has no debt,
its ordinary income exceeding its ordinary ex
penses, after every allowance made for waste and
extravagance. The several States, as they make
their own laws, maintain their own jurisdiction,
keep up courts to interpret and executives to en
force their laws, only get into debt when legisla
tures are reckless or imprudent. In these cases,
the debts are made by the machinations of
knaves, who obtain appropriations for objects
which should be paid for and maintained by in
dividuals or private corporations that can conduct
such business more economically than the body-

politic.
But in the case of the minor public corpor
ations, the cities, towns, and villages, debt may
be often properly incurred, under strong restric
tions, and with proper provisions for its discharge.
A growing municipality needs paving, curbing,
sewering and lighting its streets ; it needs an effi

cient police to protect the persons and property

of its citizens

it needs a water-system and the
proper buildings and apparatus for the transac
tion of its business, and the quenching of fires ;
it requires numerous officers for carrying out all
these objects.
Above all, it requires a well;

organized school-system.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

168

For most of these things, with prudent manage
ment, the ordinary taxes will suffice, and the

is

is

a

;

?

it

is

is

it

it,

motto, " Pay as you go," should be impressed
upon organized political communities as well as
individuals.
The greater part of the cost of
sewering, paving, and curbing should fall upon
the property-holders directly benefitted, but part
of
with the lighting of the streets, should
come out of the public treasury, since
the
whole people who enjoy the easement of the pub
lic highways, and are interested in the general
health. The water used by individuals
paid
for by them —
only that used in public offices,
and for the quenching of fires, that costs the city
anything.
there then to go beyond the
What occasion
ordinary receipts
The erection
Very little, but very important.
of water-works, the cost of a fire-apparatus and its
housing, the building of school-houses and pub
lic halls, require at the beginning a larger amount
of money than can be raised in one lump by the
annual tax-levy. A sum in gross for such pur
poses may be properly enough borrowed in an
ticipation of revenue but never without
sinking
fund, nor so large that the tax for the sinking
fund shall become oppressive.
Unfortunately, until of recent years, these prin
ciples have been lost sight of, and a list of the
load under which our leading cities labor, shows

SKELETON ESSAYS.

169

large amounts of debt for whose extinction no
means have been provided ; and the debts of
some of these are so huge as to work forfeiture of
one-third or more of the real-estate of the prop
erty-holders. In some cases the city is bankrupt,
unable to pay the interest on its obligations, and
nearly all have heavy taxes imposed upon the
The real-estate owner may get back
residents.

in increased rents what he pays out, and the store
keeper in profits; but the toiler has no resource.
It is very nice to have " all the modern improve
ments" in our municipalities, water, gas, electric
lights, a well-ordered police, an effective fire-de
partment, smooth streets, a well-devised system
of sewerage, a proper health-system, well-man
aged schools, and well-ventilated, airy and large

a

is

it,

market-houses ; but we should not have these be
yond our means. Public business is merely that
part of private business which affects the citizen
in his relations to the community ; it is that part
of his private affairs which has to be done under
public supervision. The rules that make private
business successful apply to
and foremost
the one that forbids
among these
debt to be
incurred without having provided for its payment
at maturity, and not to be incurred at all except
for purposes of profit.
[Consult the record of debts in the recent census vol
umes, and read Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations.]

170

SKELETON ESSAYS.
HOBBIES

AND THEIR

RIDERS.

A

man with a hobby is generally considered a
nuisance, and when he persists in mounting it,

and causing it to prance and curvet before our
eyes, we call him contemptuously — " a crank".
That does not trouble him much, since the term,
or something similar, has been applied to one
who has brains to conceive an idea and courage
to defend it, during all ages, and will be to the
Often, indeed, the hobbies are
end of time.
lame, blind, weak-kneed, spavined and windgalled, with very scurvy riders ; but frequently
they are good steeds, in sound condition, and
their riders capable of managing them.
We
should not despise hobbies. Almost every great
discovery, every great achievement, every addi
tion to the comfort or luxury of man, every im
provement in our social, moral or political con
dition, came before us at first as a hobby, and
brought no end of ridicule on itself and its rider.
In the early records of New England there may
be found an account of a reaping-machine.
It
was the hobby of one of the so-called cranks of
the day, and after sufficiently amusing the staid
colonists, the rider was ordered out, and the
hobby died and made no sign. Two centuries
after, M'Cormick mounted the same hobby.
He
was a more skillful rider, and rode into fame and
fortune.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

171

Howe was another of these cranks, and rode
the sewing-machine hobby amid ridicule and
jeers to a success.
We all know the history of Columbus, that
champion crank, who rode his hobby of the west
ern shore of India through various courts, amid
the set-backs and snubs of courtiers and scientists
alike. It is true that he did not discover the
coasts of farther India, and that he mounted the
wrong hobby altogether ; but he discovered a
new continent, and though he never knew the
magnificent result of his hobby, is honored for
what he never intended and never did.
Fulton rode his hobby to some purpose, as our
streams testify, and lived to find his hobby be
stridden by many others ; although when it was
ridden by Oliver Evans, Fitch and Rumsey, it
was thought to be a sorry steed indeed, one of the

Rosinante breed.
Franklin's hobby was the sire of hobbies since
curvetted on to some purpose by Morse, Edison
and others.
Our forefathers rode the hobby of independence
and the autonomy of States, through seven long
years of blood and suffering, but they got to the
winning line at last.
Garrison and his colleagues rode the hobby of
abolition, to the disgust of the great majority, to
find it reach the end of its race, because those
who rode the hobby of two sets of States on this

12C

172

SKELETON ESSAYS.

continent, became unhorsed and thrown in the
ditch during the efforts.
None of these hobbies were charming sights
in their day. They pranced amid the jeers of be
holders. Their riders were the butts of wise
Such miserable
fools and learned numskulls.
jades had never been bestridden by man before.
They were lean and weak, without a single good
point. In the end they showed that though they
might lack speed they had bottom.
How many hobbies ridden to-day amid general
laughter, may not come to the winning-post amid
the cheers and waving of handkerchiefs of the
mob ! Hobbies now, they may be triumphant
racers to-morrow. Success is a great beautifier.
Therefore despise not hobbies. Reserve your
jeers till the animals be dead, and the riders over
thrown ; or you may be obliged to eat humblepie, and acknowledge the weakness of your judg
ment.
[Bsckwith's History of Inventions, and the histories of
various countries, will furnish an abundance of illustra

tions.]
SOCIETY.

When

a man

by patient industry, rigid econ

omy and matchless thrift, has accumulated a for
tune, built or bought him a palace in one of the
avenues, or a fashionable cross-street, and settled

SKELETON ESSAY8.

173

If,

down to enjoy the result of his toil and prudence,
his wife and daughters insist that he shall wash
his horny hands, encase his substantial feet in
patent leather, don a claw-hammer coat and a
white neck-tie, and knock at the front door of
This "Society", according to them, is
society.
the House called Beautiful which crowns the sum
mit of the Hill of Difficulty, and in it are untold
delights. To avoid their importunities, he makes
the effort, and, by means of an ample cheque
book, succeeds.
when he entered, he found
the inmates were of his own kind, or even those

/

is

a

a

;

;

to whose culture and character he could bow, he
might be content, and go through the long
corridors, and in and out the lofty halls, feeling as
stiff and uncomfortable as a hog in armor. But
when he has effected his entrance he finds few of
his kind there, and none whom he can reverence,
but rather those who acquired their wealth — their
only recommendation —by methods less honest
than his own. There he finds the wealthy con
tractor who has accumulated riches by cheating
the State
the smug alderman who has obtained
masses of boodle in return for surrendering the
rights of the municipality the financier who, be
ginning as curbstone broker, has by a series of
millionaire, and
successful robberies become
derived from capital
others whose income
gained by pandering to vice and partaking in
villainy. Besides his uncongenial associates, he

174

SKELETON ESSAYS.

He finds that he is
merely in the ante-chamber of society, which
lies just beyond, with the door locked.
If he
once entered he would find the same difficulty —
another locked and barred door, beyond which is
another, and beyond that another, until finally
there is a secret and inner chamber to which only
a select few — the cream of the cream — are ad

is met with another misery.

mitted.

,

Now what is this society, into which so many
desire to find entrance ? If it were an aggrega
tion of the cultured and refined, knit together
by the bond of a common sympathy, and en
gaged in that pleasant social intercourse which
relieves life of much of its weariness, it were desirable to form a part of it. But the pursuits and
pleasures of the so-called society, of whatever
grade, are frivolous and frequently puerile. In the
rude country athletic sports there is at least excite
ment for the mind, and development of muscle.
Even base-ball is cheering, and a foot-race, or a
boat-race, excites pleasure in the contestants, and
interest in the spectators. But what is there to
cheer or to ennoble, to cultivate the mind, or
enlarge the thews and sinews, in croquet or lawntennis ? What are the mystic pleasures of the
German, or the delights of the kettledrum ?
What are the fascinations of the evening party ?
They are all marked by degrees of weariness,
and boredom. When Solomon said "Vanity of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

175

vanities ! all is vanity", he must have written
after a fashionable rout in the city of Jerusalem,
as they were gathering up fragments of crockery
and glassware, and some of his many wives were
lamenting over lemon-stains in the Persian car
pets, preparatory to putting out the lights and
going to bed.
Where a few congenial people meet at times
at the house of one of them in the evening,
and discuss matters of interest ; when men and
women of brains and manners group together to
further some public good, or some scheme of pri
vate benevolence ; when those of like pursuits
and like sympathies herd together because there
is a special affinity between them, there you have
the only society that is worth living for. All the
rest is " leather and prunella."

JUST BALANCE OF THE UNION.

In all

countries under a representative form of
government, whether a republic or a constitutional
monarchy, there are necessarily two political
parties, differing as to the proper policy to be
pursued in the conduct of public affairs. There
may be a half-dozen parties, but the greater
portion of these, arising upon immediate ques
tions, are necessarily ephemeral ; and the main
parties are reduced to two, whose difference

176

SKELETON ESSAYS.

One party is a supporter of the
the government, and desires to strengthen it and
concentrate power at the centre, looking upon
the popular judgment as fickle if not untrained ;
the other is jealous of the government, and would
give it as little power as possible, reserving to
the people the utmost freedom of action consist
ent with good order.
One party, if unchecked, would lead to despot
ism ; and the other, to anarchy. Good men be
long to both, and believe in both, and are equally
well-meaning. This same difference of opinion
arose in the convention that framed the Federal
and each side fought there for
Constitution,
supremacy. The result was a compromise, by
which the extremes of the two factions were
avoided ; and that result is embodied in the
Constitution under which the United States exist,
both as united, and as separate States.
But though the written constitution lays down
in the plainest terms the relative powers of the
States and the Federal government — of the indi
vidual States and United States, and the right of
the people under both governments, the same
contest of the two great parties continues, and
the same attempts to approach centralism on one
side, and localism on the other.
Happily be
tween both stands the tribunal created to hold the
just balance of the Union, by authoritative inter
pretation of disputed passages of the Constitution,

is radical.

SKELETON ESSATS.

177

and interposing against the tendency of either
party which happens to be in power, the barrier
of the fundamental law.
The remarkable aptitude of our people for selfgovernment, and the power of the written law
over the passions of men, is shown in the history
of the Supreme Court. The offices of chief and
associate justices have been filled by lawyers
from both political parties, most of whom had
been not only partisan in politics, but at times
bitterly so. Yet their decisions have been safe,
conservative, practically unanimous, and gener
ally acquiesced in. And a still more remarkable
fact is of comparatively recent occurrence. Dur
ing the sectional war, and for many years -after,
one party, the Republican, was in power. The
tendency of that party was toward centralism, as
It ap
its opponent's leaning is the other way.
pointed judges of its own political faith. Yet when
a question arose under the constitution involving
the reserved rights of the States, these very
judges decided it adversely to the general views
of the party from which they sprang, and whose
Outside,
views they had as citizens maintained.
they were partisans, with desire for party success;
but in the court, they were judges, and gave a
just interpretation of the fundamental law as they
found it That, had the question been one involv
ing the rights of the Federal government, and
the judges been of the opposite party, the decis-

r

SKELETON ESSAYS.

178

is

;

is

it,

ions would have been equally impartial and just,
no one but the prejudiced will deny. Such things
show where the true balance of the Union lies,
and how it will be preserved, at least so long as
we have a judicial tribunal made up of learned
and conscientious judges, and a people educated
to respect and obey its decisions.
It is this education to obedience that secures
freedom to a people jealous of their rights, and
order in public affairs with those accustomed to
They have
the utmost license of expression.
been trained to it for over two centuries under
the local governments which the necessity of the
Hence the
case caused the colonies to create.
same tractability was transferred to the judicial
portion of the general government, and an ac
quiescence which they yield grudgingly to the
executive and legislative branches.
Abroad,
where they establish a republic, it is something in
the form but without the spirit of republicanism.
The people have not been educated to
there is
no tribunal to whose decision the people readily
bow there
no balance, and the form of gov
ernment
liable to be changed at any moment
by popular commotion.

a

S.

[Examination of the prominent political decisions of
the U.
Supreme Court from the very beginning, will
show
number of cases wherein the non-partisan char
acter

of the court

was maintained, and the politician com
]

pletely sunk in the jurist.

/

/

SKELETON ESSATS.

v>

179

JOURNALISM, IDEAL AND REAL.

A

free press is an admirable institution, and a
necessity to the maintenance of freedom in a rep
resentative State.
To make it strong it should

make fair comment on public events.
But freedom may degenerate into license, and the
fairness born of right and justice maybe replaced
by the foulness springing from base motives.
Ideally, the journalism of this country is excellent;
really, it is not. Like any other thing established
purely for purposes of gain, it pursues the ob
ject of its institution without regard to the clean
ness
or dirtiness of the road by which it
travels.
While there may be exceptional jour
nals, the general tone and methods of journalism
in this country are not creditable, and, at times,
be free to

scarcely decent.

We do not speak of the little rural

sheets which

existence by doing the
dirty work of each political party, and by pander
ing to certain petty interests, but of those daily
journals, of large circulation, published in the
great cities, furnished with the ablest writers,
managed by men of ability, and bringing to their
They are at
proprietors most princely revenues.
times unjust in their comments on public affairs,
abusive to private individuals, slavish to public
prejudice, tyrannical in action, dogmatic in asser
tion, intolerant of dissent, and cruel to the weak.
maintain

a precarious

/'

180

They are

SKELETON ESSAYS.
rarely

corrupt, since they are rich
enough to spurn bribes ; but they continually
mistake abuse for argument and scurrility for wit.
As a general thing the larger journals aim at
accuracy in their statements of current events,
and spare no expense to obtain correct news.
But here and there in our larger cities have
sprung up journals who have attained great cir
culations, and who do not hesitate, not merely to
color news, in order to make it attractive, but
even to invent it. Every now and then their col
umns will contain a long and blood-curdling ac
count of crime or accident, given with great
circumstantiality of detail, with an editorial com
ment boasting of the superior enterprise which
has given to them what no other journals could
Nor can any other journals vie with
obtain.
them in the matter, since the whole story, place,
persons and circumstances, were evolved from
the fertile imagination of some mendacious mem
ber of the staff, or purchased from some "space
writer" whose inventive faculties have earned
him bread and beer for a week.
The political journals of the country seem to
be no worse than those who call themselves in
dependent, and whose independence is servility
to one or other of the two parties under a mask.
The political journals are the least mischievous of
the two, since we expect them to have no scru
ples when the interest of their own party is in

SKELETON ESSAYS.

181

volved, and we take their assertions, especially if

*

we be of the opposite party, with a grain of salt.
Of course, there are many notable exceptions
in the shape of journals that aim to be truthful
and just, and fail only through the weakness of
Some of these are managed with
human nature.
ability and decency, as well as with some regard to
the rights of others ; but, as the stream is no purer
than its source, these rarely are as pecuniarily
successful as the less scrupulous sheets which
pander to depraved popular taste, and receive a
large share of public patronage.
It must not be inferred, however, that journal
ism has deteriorated in this country.
On the
contrary, it has improved in every respect. A
with the newspapers of fifty to
comparison
seventy-five years since — even with those of
thirty years ago, show that the methods, the tone,
the manliness of journalism now are far beyond
what they were, and that, if journalism be not
what it should be, it has made large approaches
to perfection.
Its aims are larger, its conduct
more vigorous, and it embraces in its service
more skilled servants, and more men of trained
brains than it did in the palmiest days of the
past.

t

J

SKELETON MSSAT8.

162

WHEN REBELLION IS JUSTIFIED.

For a number of people, or even the population
of

a

country in mass, to enter the field against

their rulers, is to inaugurate the miseries of war,
and of that most bloody and unscrupulous of all
contests, a civil war. Rebellion is a crime, and
never has succeeded and never will, from the fact
that when it succeeds, it is no longer rebellion,
A revolution even is rarely
but revolution.
To properly rebel — to open a contest
peaceful.
in which brother is arrayed against brother and
father against son, requires certain conditions to
justify or even excuse it. These are the unbear
able wrongs of the governed ; the absence of any
other effective remedy for these wrongs, the good
will of the greater number of the oppressed, and
a fair prospect of success.
I. The wrongs should be unbearable. In the case
of the Thirteen colonies, although the imposition
of a trifling tax might have been borne without
inconvenience, merely considered of itself, yet it
was only part of a number of measures all tend
ing to one object, namely, the taxation of a free
people without their consent, by a body in which
they were not represented, thus reducing them
from the position of an integral portion of a con
stitutional monarchy, to that of a mere appanage
of the crown. Such a condition was unbearable,

SKELKTO N ESS AYS.

183

and when the design became evident, it was only
proper judgment that caused it to be resisted,
while resistance was possible.
In the case of France, the revolt was the result
of long years of oppression on the part of king
and nobles, until the lower classes had been bru
talized, and been reduced to the last condition of
sufferance.

The American and the first French revolution
were justified by the wrongs which provoked
them.
2. The absence of any other effective remedy for
The colonies, through their own
these wrongs.
chosen representatives, had humbly petitioned for
the redress of wrongs. They had asserted their
loyalty to the throne, and their desire to remain
of their British brethren.
the fellow-subjects
They had respectfully though firmly remonstrated
with their oppressors, and endeavored in every
manly way to check their course of wrong. Fail
ing all this, being spurned with insult, and having
their soil invaded by hostile armies, the colonics
armed for their defense, and driven to bay, de
clared themselves to be independent States,
whose political connection with Great Britian had
been dissolved by the acts of the latter, and so
began a rebellion which ended in revolution.
The French masses in the same way knew of
no other remedy than a violent change ; but un
like the Americans, they had not been trained to

SKELETON ESSAYS.

184

local self-government.
With them, power had
always been held at the seat of government ;
they had not the wit to decentralize it. The re
sults of the two cases differed naturally. With
the colonies, there followed a stable government
built on existing forms ; with France, anarchy,
oligarchy, despotism, and from thence continual
changes in form, all despotic, no matter what
their kind. The fault was not in the remedy,
which was the only one left ; but that the aftertreatment did not fit the habits of the people,
which are not suited to the simplicity of a repub

lic.
3. The

good

oppressed.

will of

the greater number

of

the

In the Revolution the greater part of

4.

it.

the people sympathised with the movement for
independence ; but there were a large number of
loyalists, who were devoted to the crown, and
detested rebellion as a crime, and rebels as crimi
The majority, however, were in sympathy,
nals.
and though the wave rose and fell, the tide was
in favor of change. It was a persistent and set
tled purpose also.
In France, the majority may have desired a
change, but did not show
While the mob
reigned in Paris the great masses outside of Paris
Centralism, however, had made
were passive.
Paris to be France, and the majority in the city
made the revolution.
There

must

be

a

fair

prospect

of

success.

SKELETON ESSAYS.
Though all the other requisites

135

be there — unbear

able wrongs, absence of other effective methods,

and a general popular support — yet if there be no
reasonable prospect of success, rebellion is not
justifiable. Where the ruling power is strong,
compact and well-organized, and has powerful
fleets and armies at command, to rebel is not
only to put the rebels themselves in peril, but to
endanger the lives of women and children, and
helpless non-combatants, whom neither side, in
the fury of war, will respect. A rebellion almost
or quite certain to end as well as continue in
blood, no matter what the wrong may be, is in
tensely criminal.
And yet a revolt, though its suppression rivets
the chains more firmly on the revolters for the
time, frequently gains its end in the future by
calling attention to the wrongs complained of.
To the rebellion in Canada may be traced in great
measure the policy by which the government of
Great Britian accorded a slighty restricted au
tonomy to her colonies, and probably will, in the
not very remote future, accord the same to
Ireland. This is merely an incident, not justifi
cation. And the so-called rebellion in Canada
was, after all, a comparatively harmless affair. It
had no strong popular support, and was scarcely
more than a political riot, which called the atten
tion of the home government to the danger of
ruling colonies entirely from the centre, and made

186

.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

them wisely accord that local self-government to
the colonies which they as unwisely deny to a
part of their empire nearer home.
[The rising of the gladiators under Spartacus; that of
the Swiss under the mythical Tell, and the Polish insur
rections may be used to show where rising against wrongs
was justifiable or unjustifiable.]

THE RIGHT OF EMINENT

The right

DOMAIN.

of eminent domain, — that is, the

paramount ownership of all the land in an organ
ized political community, is the highest attrib
In England it is vested in
ute of sovereignty.
the sovereign, who is an individual.
In this
country, where the sovereignty is theoretically the
people, eminent domain is vested in the State,
which is the aggregation of the people for the
purpose of political control. It does not lie with
the Federal government which is a mere union of
the States, and which is limited in that matter by
the constitution under which it exists, but is re
served to each State. Most, if not all of the
States, have limited their power in this respect,
or rather restricted it ; but where they have made
no such limit in their fundamental law, or chosen
to remove the limit, they have the proprietorship
of every foot of ground within their several
boundaries at their mercy.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

187

This right of eminent domain, though often

a

is

is

is

is

a

it

is

if

it,

held in abeyance, is nevertheless distinctly as
serted in several ways. A man can only acquire
the ownership, which is in this case the mere use
and enjoyment of real estate, in such manner and
under such conditions as the State by law pro
vides. He can hold it only under legal restric
tions. He can alienate it by sale or gift only in
He can devise it by
the mode set down by law.
his will and testament only under the same di
Should he die without a testament, the
rection.
law declares which of his kinsfolk shall possess
and
he leave no kindred, the State resumes
possession, and becomes again the absolute
owner.
It will be thus seen that the tenure of land in
this country
that of
fee, and not absolute.
The uses and control of all real property are regu
lated by the judgment of the State, and are subject
to the supreme law of the public good. A man
can not do as he pleases with his own, simply
not his own. At every step he
because
hedged in by provisions of law. He
merely
a tenant of the State.
He may feel all the pride
of ownership, but his ownership
subordinate to
the right of eminent domain. So far indeed does
this sovereignty extend that the federal govern
ment, whose powers, where they are so set down,
are absolute, can not enter upon any part of the
State, except under the express
territory of

SKELETON ESSAYS.

188

consent of the latter, and under such forms and
methods as the State may decree.
[For treating this subject more fully, the writer may
consult the decision of the Supreme Court of the United
States, in the case reported in 7 Peters, 243, and also 6
How, 507. See also 15 How, 426, and 3 Zabiiskie, 624.

ASSOCIATION AS A MEANS OF PROGRESS.

The old proverb "In Union there is strength"
— the " L'Union fait la Force" of the Belgians, —
is as applicable to persons as to communities.
No
one doubts the increased strength of the States
of America, or the States of Germany, because of

What individuals fail to do singly,
is readily effected by an aggregation of individ

their union.

Hence the weak nat
uals in a corporate form.
urally associate in order to cope with the strong,
and hence, carrying the idea to the point of ab
surdity, a large school of political economists
look to association as a general panacea for the
evils of society, and look upon single action as
an insufficient factor in the problem of human

In fact, the whole world is tending
progress.
that way, and syndicates of capitalists are formed
for the purpose of purchasing and managing al
most everything by joint-stock companies.
Yet it is only a comparatively few years since
the attempts of Fourier and ethers to combine

SKELETON ESSAYS.

189

producers into joint-stock companies from which
each stockholder drew according to his earnings,
for this is what Fourierism, stripped of its ver
biage, really meant, excited general derision.
We heard a deal then about the independence of
the individual, and lively protests against sinking
The world is
the man in the little community.
drifting to the opposite extreme, through sheer
necessity. For there are now so many million
aires that those of moderate incomes are forced
to combine in order to hold their own in the race
of competition.
The craze is deepened by avarice. " Much
desires more," and will obtain it. The example
of the money-makers is not lost upon the masses
who never could obtain much money, and never
will. The trades-unions, the labor-societies, and
kindred organizations of workmen, are the efforts
to use association as a means to gain their ends,
to preserve their rights, and better their condi
tion.
They are directly opposed to the larger
capitalists, and in a country where the ballot is
in popular Rands, the strife should not be so un
equal. Yet that very universal distribution of the
ballot is a means to defeat the combination of the
poor. So soon as a political party leans toward
the workingmen, the opposite party, under the
lead of, and aided by the money of combined
capital, proceeds to either buy up enough indi
vidual voters for their purposes, or to seduce the

SKELETON ESSAYS.

190

masses into a third party, which draws from the
party of their friends, and assures the money-

The trades-unions and labor
kings a triumph.
organizations are thus weakened or disintegrated,
and the object of the workingmen's association is
foiled.
It takes time and dearly bought experience to
teach fools a lesson, but thej' are taught in the
end.
It is a dull ass indeed that will not mend
his paces by beating, and in process of time
poorer men will discover the strength of united
effort, and bend their energies toward perfecting
and strengthening
the association which is
needed for their protection and progress. As
there are hundreds of poor to every one who is in
moderate circumstances, and thousands to every
one who is rich, the advantages of association
will finally fix themselves on the public mind,
and the schemes of knaves will no longer baffle
united effort. There may be no millenium even
then, but a decidedly better state of affairs.

WHY STRIKES FAIL.
The records show that a large proportion of
the strikes of the workmen and laborers in the
country utterly fail to achieve their object. What
however, is the loss to both parties.
Less sympathy is felt for the losses of employers

is

worse,

SKELETON ESSAYS.

191

than employed, since the action of the latter is
mostly prompted by real grievances, and not
through caprice. But, outside of the equity in
volved, the naked fact remains, that far the
greater number of the strikes are dismal failures ;
and, when we consider the loss of earnings to the
men and their families, and the consequent mis
ery, the whole thing is lamentable.
Why do they mostly fail ?
There are various causes that conspire to ren
der the stand-out of the men useless.
The first, of course, is the fact that the employ
ers can, as a general thing, sustain loss better than
the men. In some trades, where a heavy plant
is required, and where there happens to be a
steady demand for the products, capital suffers
extremely. There a strike is soon ended by sur
render or compromise.
But in most of them, the
loss is not more than the capital can bear. Here,
the possession of money gives the employer an
The suffering of the strikers begins
advantage.
as soon as their own reserved fund and the con
tributions of their fellows are exhausted. Before
the pangs of hunger, especially of those depen
dent on the bread-winners, enthusiasm dies out,
courage is dampened, and the combination of
laborers gradually melts away.
Another cause is the fact that, owing to the
subdivision of the trades through machinery and
improved processes, there are few in which skilled

/*"

J92

SKELETON ESSAYS.

workmen are a necessity. Where all or even the
greater portion of the workmen employed, are
required to be skilled in that particular handi
craft, their strike stops work entirely.
They can
not be replaced, for skilled workmen are not
made in a week, and production ceases until they
return to labor. But when a man tends a ma
chine which turns out one part, and another man
another machine turning out another part, and so
on all through, the workmen need be no more
skilled than the machine, and any defection is
easily filled from the crowds that are seeking for
something Jo do.
And in that great mass of the unemployed,
both skilled and unskilled, lies the crowning
cause of the frequent failures of strikes.
There is
more supply of, than demand for labor, and this
surplus of laborers is continually augmented by
Some of this
fresh importations from Europe.
comes because the workman abroad hears of the
high wages paid here, but not of the high cost of
living, and he rushes to the country as El Dorado.
Employers, both individual and corporate, in de
fiance of law, import men under contract to work
It is true
at wages less than those current here.
that a number of those thus brought here under
false pretenses, finding themselves to be dupes,
join strikes in the end, and stand by their order,
but many do not, being mostly ignorant of the
Any
language spoken, and frequently debased.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

193

defection is more than made up by newer impor
tations, and the excess of supply over demand in
the labor-market swells yearly.
It will be seen why strikes fail, and why they
must continue to fail, so long as our present reve
nue system keeps the raw material of our manu

factures dear, confining our products to a limited
home market, and furnishing employment for
only a portion of those who seek for it
and search the annual
reports of the various State Labor-Bureaus for further
[See

statistics in Bradstreet's,

data.]

TRUSTS, POOLS AND SYNDIGATES.

We hear much through the public journals, and
from the tongues of orators upon the rostrum, of
pools, trusts, syndicates, and other combinations
by which the necessities or luxuries of life are in
creased in price to the consumer to the profit of
the conspirators.
These combinations are not,
as is supposed, an American invention.
They
were brought here from the other side of the At
lantic.
Nor did they originate there.
They
were one of the first villainies of organized com
munities. Though not specially mentioned in
Holy writ, there can scarcely be a doubt that
they existed in the antediluvial world, and had the
records been preserved, we should be able to read

SKELETON ESSAYS.

134

of a brick-trust and a pool in slime about the time
when they were building the Tower of Babel.
There is something more to tell in connection

8

&

7

it,

with this matter. By the English common law,
which is the law in every state in this Union,
where not repealed or modified by statute, the
offence of buying up or forestalling the market
of provisions or other necessaries of life, and
holding them for a rise, —which is done under
these trusts and pools, whether by syndicates or
individuals, and under the name of forestalling,
engrossing or regrating, is a misdemeanor, sub
ject to indictment, and punishable by fine and
The law has fallen into disuse;
imprisonment.
the knaves drive a coach and four through it; but
it is there, and could be enforced. So far our
trust-barons have made no attempt to repeal
though they generally own the legislatures, with
But the trust-barons
the governors thrown in.
of England are bolder than ours. By the act of
Victoria, c. 24, the offences of forestalling,
engrossing and regrating have been abolished in
England, and trusts and pools legalized, to the
great satisfaction of all scamps in that way
offending. It will be thus seen that our British
cousins have gone farther in that march of im
" The Rogue's
provement vulgarly known as
March" — a movement, not sideways like that of
the crab, but backwards.
A recent instance of this nefarious conspiracy

SKELETON ES8ATS.

196

of the price of sugar,
combination — a splen

is to be seen in the advance

four cents per pound, by a
did gain by the trust, and a heavy tax upon every,
head of a family in the country.
Nor does the
sugar-trust stand alone. It has plenty of vicious
company. The coal-trust, the oil-trust, the flourtrust, the lumber-trust, the salt-trust — but there
is no end to them. Even water has been in
some places made the subject of a trust, and
monopolized by a syndicate. The air we breathe
has not yet been engrossed, but its time is to
come.
These men must have seen that they are play
ing with fire which may some time consume them.
But, emboldened by their success, they look but
to the gains of to-day, and have no heed for the
"After me, the deluge,"
peril of to-morrow.
seems to be their motto.
So long as the dumb
asses bear the burthens, with no more complaint
than an occasional bray, why should they
slacken in their greed of gain ? What does it
matter that the poor have new difficulties placed
in their path of life every day ? The conspirators
do not feel these. They eat, drink and are merry ;
they wear fine broadcloth, and sit in the sanct
uary with pious faces. What law can be passed
to curb those who fill legislative bodies with their
creatures, and the courts with their tools ? Can
it last ? They seem to think so. So thought the
ancienne noblesse of France, but when wrong rose

196

SKELETON ESSAYS

to its height, the Sans-culottes rose also, and then
— the noyades and the guillotine.
,

[Search the histories of France, Germany and Holland,
for the bread-riots, and other revolts against the trusts of

old.]

STATE HELP OR SELF HELP.
Whether it be because of the constant infusion
of a foreign element differently trained from our
own, or because the character of our countrymen
is changing, and we are losing the spirit of selfreliance once so characteristic of our people, the
naked truth remains that thousands of individuals
are calling every now and then, as the wagoner
did to Herakles, to help them where they should
help themselves. Projects are put forward for
the government to do all kinds of things that
should be the subject of private enterprise ; and
if it be not stopped, we shall have some lazy
fellows calling on the municipality to put every
man's coal in his cellar, and on the State to estab
lish a department to hitch every man's suspenders
on the back buttons of his waistband.
These people have quite forgotten, if they ever
learned, the nature of our government, and the
theory on which its constitution is based. In a"
despotism, as in the family, the head of the State
is absolute, and the proprietor of everything.

SKELETON ESSAYS.
From him,

197

as from a centre, radiate blessings; and

any good which his subjects desire must come
his gift.

In such

as

a government, the people may

properly look for help from the State. But the
form and substance of our political organization
are different. Here the head of the State is the

head servant of the people. All officers of State
are popular servants. But the nature of their
services is defined. The government exists for
the transaction of such public business as may be
required, and nothing more ; and that business is
only such as is incident to the affairs of the mass
as a community, and not as individuals.
The
whole object is to govern as little as possible,
and to leave individuals with as little trammels
on their action as the nature of the case will
admit. It is not the business of the State to help
the citizen, but to remove all obstacles that may
be in the way of his helping himself.
He is not
the ward of the sovereign, but an integral part of
the sovereignty.
He is independent and not de
pendent ; and arty attempt on the part of the
State to do that for him which he is capable of
doing for himself is an impertinent interference
with his rights, which he should reject, and not
crave.

%/

Besides, it has been abundantly shown by ex
perience, that for the State to engage in any
business beyond the making, expounding and
enforcing its laws — certainly any business that

CEN3ALcouecT|ON

198

SKELETON ESSAYS.

can be carried on by individuals,
the community in several ways.

It

— is injurious to

is costly; for State work, even that which is
needed, is never carried on so economically as
when it is done by individuals for their own
profit.
It is corrupting ; for it leads to attempts of
office-holders to prostitute their position to private
gain, and affords them opportunities for pecula
tion and fraud.
It is dangerous ; for it creates a larger number
of office-holders, who are sure to sustain the gov
ernment in any usurpation, and who are apt to
regard their places less as trusts than as means
for a livelihood, and frequently as conveniences
for plunder.
It deadens the manhood of the people, and
would utterly destroy the keenness, self-reliance
and manly independence which has hitherto
marked our citizens.
Beyond doubt, the conduct of many things,
such as our railways, expresses and telegraphs,
by greedy corporations, has been marked by
carelessness, insolence and even rapacity.
The
remedy is not to transfer the business to the care
of the State, whose officials would have less fear
of the consequences of neglect and insolence than
The true treat
the servants of a corporation.
ment of the evils under which we labor, is to curb
the corporations ; to restrain them within just

SKELETON ESSAYS.

199

to subject them to the inexorable rules
of law ; and to undertake nothing by the State
which private persons can do. Any business
controlled by the government naturally becomes
a monopoly ; the prices are fixed by those in
power, and those forced to become patrons, arc
deprived of the benefits of competition.

bounds

;

[Consult any of the large English and Continental
histories for the combinations of merchants and others
during the middle ages, the journals of the period ; such
works as "Old London Merchants", and other sources,
for further points.]

BI-METALISM,
IN FAVOR OF.

From the very earliest period that man engaged
in traffic, the precious metals have been used as
representatives of value, and though copper, pure
or alloyed, was coined, it was merely to facilitate
minor transactions, and under a fixed and not in
trinsic worth. Gold and silver became the stand
ard, and however plentiful the one might grow
to be over the other, their relative values were
The Bible shows their
kept but little impaired.
They were used by
use among the Hebrews.
the Greeks and Romans, even so far back as the
Egyptians. The Chinese used them from a time
lost in the shadows of the past, and use them

S

SKELETON ESSAYS.

200

both to-day. There is no civilized country to-day
without its coinage, and in all these, gold and sil
ver are alike necessary. Even where we have
paper money, it is not used as the representative
of value, but of coin.

The point is that both metals are required, and
that both vary not long in their relative value.
When gold was found in larger quantities than
usual in California, and afterward in Australia,
there was talk of its purchasing power depreciat
ing. But it resumed its old position speedily.
The great increase in the production of silver has
for a time lowered its comparative value ; but that

is

it

a

is

it

it,

very cheapness has caused its more general use
in the arts and as a thing of luxury, and it will
gradually return to its old position. To demone
tise
as has been madly proposed, would only
lead to its necessary remonetisation in the future.
To confine the coinage of silver to the amount
necessary for home use, in ordinary transactions,
and reduce silver from the position of a standard
to that of a mere convenience, would mainly con
fine its employment to artistic and mechanical
to the condition of the
purposes, and degrade
true, that
baser metals. It
would be then
used instead of copper and bronze, at least until
human invention had perfected
cheaper process
for the production of aluminium, when the latter
would in great measure take its place. But this
impracticable, because the barbarous and

SKELETON ESSAYS.

201

partially-civilized peoples with whom the greater
part of our trade will be for centuries, are accus

a

a

is

is

is

a

is

it

is

is

is

is

it is

is

it,

tomed to silver, and will have
in conjunction
with gold, in preference to any other metal in
exchange for their commodities.
The objection to silver on account of its inferior
fanciful. A note for fifty cents
portability
more easily carried than a half-dollar, and so
is sooner worn out, and more liable to be lost A
silver coin will lose some of its weight by abrasion,
not lost The
but the greater part of the metal
note, on the contrary,
often so worn as to be
worthless, since its value
not intrinsic, but
The loss by the destruction or
representative.
loss of paper money
large yearly, and a great
profit to the government, or to the banks of issue.
But
severe tax on the people, and generally
only in
upon those least able to bear it It
large transactions that the bulk of silver becomes
inconvenient, and in these not only gold and
notes, but cheques, drafts and certificates of de
posit replace it To coin vast amounts more
an error, but that
mere
than can be used
matter of policy capable of judicious regulation,
sin
and affords no valid argument in favor of
gle standard.

202

SKELETON ESSAYS.
BI-METALISM.
AGAINST.

As in traveling,

in domestic management, and
"
in public affairs, so in coinage — When two ride
on one horse, one must ride behind". A double

a

a

is

is

is

is,

standard of value is an absurdity of itself. There
must be one and one only, and when it comes to
must
a question of the kind, mono-metalism
And when you make a
necessarily triumph.
standard, it must be the more valuable metal,
both intrinsically and because of
which gold
It proper to
the smaller amount in existence.
coin silver, copper or bronze, and all of them,
because each of these metals, as coins, plays its
own part. The number of silver coins demanded
less then those of
for ordinary transactions
less for circula
bronze. The coinage of gold
tion than as a basis and security for the bank
notes or treasury-notes which can most conveni
ently pass from hand to hand. Silver can not
basis, since its value fluctu
wisely be used as
silver dollar to
The note representing
ates.
day, may represent only 75 per cent, of the value
in gold to-morrow. . The note representing one
dollar in gold, remains at all times the same. It
may be easily redeemed at its face value, while
the silver dollar will only bring what may be the
market value of the silver, which fluctuates greatly,
at the time of redemption.

N

SKELETON ESSAYS.

SOS

It

may be necessary for civilized States to coin
large amounts of silver for transactions with
countries where gold is not used. Certainly, they
will not be slow in pursuing a course to their own
It is buying their metal cheap, and
advantage.
selling their coin dear. But though, after the
habit of human nature, they take advantage of
the folly of the foreign seller, it does not follow
that they should also plunder their people. A
large coinage of silver, if commercial need require
it, does not imply that the baser metal should be
raised to the dignity of a standard, and the purer
and nobler relegated to a subsidiary place. That
were simply folly, as well as rank injustice.
[Upon the foregoing points, the argument in favor of
The various works on
mono-metalism is mainly based.
Numbers of them
both sides, it is not necessary to cite.
may be found in the booksellers' catalogues.]

PROTECTIVE DUTIES.

A

father would not permit a stranger to enter
his household, and sell to his family at a cheaper
rate, something made by his sons. While he
would not forbid the stranger from his gate, he
would endeavor to prevent him taking away the
livelihood of one so near to him. A State has
still more reason for its action in the same line,
and, being established for the benefit of all, is

304

SKELETON ESSAYS.

bound to protect each individual as far as pos
sible, and with the least injury to the rest. A
country that suffers its artisans to be crushed out
by foreign competition, unless they will submit
to those slender rewards for their toil that enables
their employers to compete with the foreigner,
may obtain allegiance, but it will not command
love and respect.
No " protectionist", as he is termed, desires to
prevent trade by making the duties on foreign
products actually prohibitive. What he asks for
is that the advantage which the foreigner pos
sesses in low wages and cheap material, shall be
counterbalanced by a tax on his goods, which
shall go into the public treasury as part of the
revenue of the country, and save the imposition
of a direct tax. But the duties should not be laid
with the object of revenue but protection, for if
laid for the former purpose, they would be likely
to encourage importations, and be the reverse of
The duty should diminish, and not
protective.
prevent importations, otherwise the price would
be unnecessarily high in the home market.
Experience has shown that this protection is apt,
in the end, to cheapen articles to the consumer.
And this it effects in two ways. The perfection
of methods which grows up in a prosperous
industry lessens the cost of production ; and com
petition lowers prices directly and indirectly —
directly, because there is soon more or less over

X

SKELETON ESSAYS.

206

production, and if not that, then indirectly,
through the fear of undue competition, if high
prices tempt capital.
list of prices of articles in common use, a hundred
years since, fifty years since, and to-day, may be had from
the various Federal and State reports, and used to sus

[A

tain the foregoing position.]

It

may be said that much of the lowering of
prices is due to the invention of labor-saving ma
That is very true, but that very inven
chinery.
tion is the result of protection.
If high duties
had not made protection profitable, we should
have had but little use for labor-saving machin
ery, our wages being so low as not to require it.
In fact, in many things, our workshops would
have been abroad.
As to the evils of over-production, they in a
great measure cure themselves. The balance of
demand and supply maintains itself in the end.
If too many enter into any line of production,
some must fail, and show " the survival of the fit
Such overcrowding where a supposed
test".
profit is to be found, is not the result of protec
tive duties, but of the avarice of man, and is no
ground of objection to a system which sustains
fair production, maintains a just compensation
for toil, and conduces to the public good.
[For further points necessary to elaborate this essay,
consult Henry C. Carey's works on Protection, which
contain the best arguments for protection. ]

206

SKELETON ESSAYS.
REVENUE DUTIES.

The Federal government established by the
constitution of the United States, is one of limited
powers. It is meant to promote the public wel
fare, and not to aggrandise a class, grant sub
sidies to favored industries, or increase the profit
The question is not so much as
of individuals.
to whether it is good policy to legislate in the
interest of certain members of the community at
the expense of the rest, but whether, in the first
place, such a course of action is just, and in the
second place, whether it is within the spirit of the
Federal powers.
The right of the government to levy taxes for
the purpose of defraying all expenses, ordinary
and extraordinary, that are needed for admin
istering affairs, and carrying out its proper
powers, is undoubted. It may do this by direct
taxation, by an excise on luxuries, or by duties
It has been the practice to rely
upon imports.
mainly upon duties on imports, arranged in a
tariff, or scale, because the people have as much
direct taxes to pay as they will bear under their
State and municipal governments, and because it
was only the needs of a war that made them
submit to an excise, which from its domiciliary
visits they abhor. In laying such duties the ob
ject is revenue, and to this it should be confined.
To lay them in such a way as to afford bounties
-.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

207

to any special class, is outside of the object of its
imposition, and foreign to the character meant
to be impressed upon our government by its
founders.

On the other hand, these duties should not be
graded so as to produce a larger amount of reve
nue than is required for an economical adminis
tration of affairs. A surplus revenue is an ab
straction of money from the pockets of the
people, uncalled for and unjust, a plunder mine
for knaves, and a fruitful source of corruption and
Nor, while it should not
malfeasance in office.
be so graded as to specially benefit any class,
should it be arranged so as to particularly injure
any one. Its imposition is a matter for careful
deliberation, and should be entered upon and ef
A tariff of duties is
fected in a spirit of fairness.
a form by which taxation may be effected, and
taxation, which is a burthen when necessary to
be cheerfully borne by the community, becomes
oppressive when wantonly made, or even made
without careful and conscientious consideration.
Of course, in framing a tariff of duties, these
principles will be lost sight of in a Congress com
posed of representatives of different interests,
and containing not a few of the paid attorneys
of powerful manufacturing corporations. Each
is desirous of benefiting his section, or his client,
and, as in the case of appropriation bills, a num
ber of compromises are introduced under what

X

SKELETON ESSAYS.

208

called " log-rolling ". A desires a
special tax, and to obtain it to suit his interest,
he agrees with B, C, D, and others, each with
special taxes in view, to support theirs, if they

is vulgarly

will support

his.

This is conspiracy,

and

a

There
knavish one at that ; but it prevails.
never yet has been a tariff framed, no matter how
just it was at first, that has not been altered in
committee, or in the main body, to suit over
whelming interests ; and there never yet has
been a tariff act passed that has not been formed
in defiance of correct principles.
Possibly, such
is the weakness, if not the villainy of human na
ture, there never will be ; but it is at least worth
while to endeavor to obtain something near a just
measure, and to aid this, to persistently iterate
the principles upon which a proper act should be
constructed.
The legislature of a free govern
ment is necessarily imperfect because of its free
dom, and nothing more can be done with it than
to approximate it to right.
[Read Secretary Walker's Report (1845-6) for further
views on this theme.]

FREE TRADE.

When the people of two independent political
communities hold intercourse between each other,
the natural tendency is to an exchange of the
v.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

209

produced, naturally or artificially,
And, as a general
within each other's bounds.
rule, one will grow, or dig from the earth, some
thing which the other does not possess, or does
not grow, or mine, to an equal amount ; or one
manufactures something which the other does
not, or vice versa.
And this may arise from a
difference of climate, or soil, or geological forma
tion, in the case of natural productions ; or
because of a superior or different degree of skill,
in artificial products.
The exchange in such a
case is to the advantage of both, and to how much
advantage, depends upon the aptness for traffic
of the respective parties.
It would seem then that wisdom would teach
that every people should take advantage of its
own capability, and make the most of it. The
natural folly of man leads him to undervalue that
which he possesses, and to overvalue the posses
sion of his neighbor ; and a spirit of rivalry
induces him to surpass the other in spite of natural
So far as Nature is concerned, she
disadvantage.
soon teaches him to cease attempts to force her,
and he would be a dull fool indeed who would
strive to grow coffee in a temperate, or wheat
in a tropical climate.
But when it comes to the
productions of ingenuity, man endeavors to pro
duce all in one country that is produced in
another by manufacturing skill. Finding himself
baffled because
his rival has a cheaper raw
commodities

210

SKELETON ESSAYS.

material, or can make at less cost, he takes up the
notion to force his own countryman to buy the
product made at home, by fixing an import tax
upon the same thing when imported from his
Retaliation follows, and the things
neighbor.
which he makes easiest and cheapest, are ex
cluded from the foreign market, and confined to
the limited consumption at home. Thus free
trade is destroyed, industry checked, and labor,
being limited to a given amount, finds its com
All this is as sensible as
pensation lowered.
an attempt to make water run up hill.
The true system with countries as with indi
viduals is to foster intercourse and exchanges to
their common and mutual advantage. A has a
bed of fine potter's clay in the vHlage of Blankville, and he makes pots there, and having his
raw material cheap, is enabled to sell them low
B, finding there
to Notown and other places.
is a large slaughter-house in Notown, and getting
by contract a monopoly of the pelts of the cattle
killed, establishes a tannery and currier's shop
there, and sells the dressed skins at a low price
at Blankville and other places. But C, at Notown,
opens a pottery. He has to bring his clay from
a long distance at great cost ; and A undersells
him. D, at Blankville, seeing the prosperity of
B, starts a tannery, but has to pay much higher
for the hides he tans and curries, and is undersold.
Instead of abandoning a business entered into

SKELETON ESSAYS.
under

211

disadvantages, they both raise a
clamor that they are ruined by foreign pauper
labor, and the one persuades the village authori
ties of Blankville to put a tax on foreign leather
coming into the village ; and the other, the authori
ties of Notown to serve foreign-made pots in the
same way.
The result is that the people of
Blankville pay a higher price for leather and
shoes and trunks and everything of which leather
is a component part ; and the people of Notown
find the prices of their pots and pipkins doubled.
The only fellows benefited are C, and D, but not
long. They only sell two-thirds as much as they
should, but they get double for it. In process of
time E and F, finding that C and D are doing so
well, set up respectively pottery and tannery.
Here is over production, competition, and ruin
ously low prices. Then C, D, E, and F, all go
to the dogs.
Free trade, and each to trade where he can find
the best market with what he can make cheap
est, is the natural course, and any attempt to
handicap it in the interest of particular persons,
results in evil.
such

[Read Sumner's, Perry's and Bastiat's work on Free
Trade, for the purpose of pursuing the theme further.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

213

INCIDENTAL

PROTECTION.

Theoretically, there can be no doubt that a free
interchange of commodities between countries is
for the common good, as well as just and equit
able ; but countries are not wisely managed ac
A
cording to any theory, however plausible.
people must be governed according to its nature.
Its habits, modes of thought, prejudices, passions,
and even its weaknesses must be considered and
allowed for, otherwise attempts at government
are failures.
The people of the United States are impatient
under their local direct taxation, and every cent
in the thousand added to their tax-bills provokes
To superadd to that
a howl of indignation.
direct taxation by the Federal government would
Hence, it is
not be patiently submitted to.
absolutely necessary to resort to indirect taxa
tion, and the only indirect taxation possible is to
levy a duty upon goods imported into the coun
try.

But in framing a tariff of duties upon imports,
the legislator has to consider something more
than the mere amount of revenue thereby to be
His business is to so carefully adjust
obtained.
the scale, the tariff, that it will lay as light a tax
on the consumer as possible, but at the same time
will handicap the foreign manufacturer who com

X

SKELETON ESSAYS.

'

213

petes with the manufactures of our own. This is
called, and is, incidental protection; and may be,
and ought to be, a matter of careful consideration.
As a further, and still more valuable incidental
protection, all raw materials not produced here,
and entering into our manufactures, should pay
no duty at all. This not only enables our own
manufacturers to compete with goods from abroad,
but to meet the foreigner on equal grounds in a
neutral market, and it cheapens the cost of the
manufactured article to the consumer here.
There is another precaution which is not
always taken, but should be, to ensure the ad
vantage of a low price to articles which are
admitted free, either because we do not make or
grow them, or they are raw material ; and that is
to make that freedom from duty contingent upon
the action of the countries from which they are
For instance — there is coffee. There
imported.
is no duty upon it now, and yet the retail price to
the consumer is nearly double what it was when
it paid a tax. The reason of that is not far to
When the duty was removed, Brazil, from
seek.
which we get the greater portion of the commod
ity, took advantage of the fact to impose an ex
port tax on every pound sent from the country,
and we pay that just as we would an import tax.
The proper plan would be to lay a heavy duty
upon coffee, but to provide that the article coming
from a country where it was shown had laid no

S

export tax on

it,

SKELETON ESSAYS.

214

should be exempt from duty,

and come in free.
a

is

taken in no published work that we
series of
can remember, but will be found laid down in

[This ground

articles written in 1888 by Dr. Thomas Dunn English in

if

The writer can easily expand the
the Newark Journal.
he desire, from the above passages.]
essay,

CIVIL SERVICE REFORM.
FOR.

The public service requires

A

as much efficiency

certain amount of necessary
to be done, and for this purpose only effi
work
In private
cient agents should be selected.
service the head of a firm or corporation, or the
single person engaged in business, requires of his
subordinate clerk honesty, for which his only
reputation and associations; capa
guarantee
bility, for which a thorough examination
neces
in itself
sary, and obedience to orders, which
honesty and faithfulness to duty.
When a
vacancy occurs in any department, the wise mana
ger selects or promotes from among those already
in his employ rather than seeking outside, because
he thus obtains experience, in addition to the
other qualifications.
It
notorious that the present system in the
of different kind. The primary
public service
a

is

is

is

is

is

is

as private service.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

,

215

object in selecting men for the civil service of the
public is to reward political partisans at every
change of administration.
Hence the main quali
fications which should be requisite, are almost if
not quite overlooked ; the consequence is neglect,
dishonesty, and a loose conduct of public affairs.
In the military service the same tests are re
quired as in private business. The sub-lieutenant
is subject to a course of training, and to a rigid
examination
for fitness.
As vacancies occur
above, he is promoted.
It is only when he has
shown exceptional capacity that he is lifted above
his seniors, and such instances are exceptional.
There can be no reason assigned why the civil
service should not be filled on the same principle,
but every reason why it should. Both services, to
be successful, require proper officials to discharge
the necessary duties, and these require equal selec
tion in training.
Permanency of tenure, where good conduct is
present, is another requisite for official excellence.
Even if the new man possess the requisite qualifi
cations, his activity and precision is not so great
at his entrance upon his place, and for some time
Even when he has mastered all the minor
after.
details with which he had not been familiar, and
fallen into the official rut, his energy is impaired
and his steadiness of work hampered by the un
certainty of his position. He is prone, however
high his sense of duty may be, to look to the favor

216

SKELETON ESSAYS.

of his superior rather than to the manner in which
executes his duty, as a means to retain his
place. This base standard deteriorates the char
acter of the public service, and debases the
official.
The improvements required in the civil service,
under the federal, State and municipal govern
ments are — I, Honesty ; 2, -Literary and business
qualifications ; 3, Correct personal habits. And
these are to be ensured by a preliminary exam
Then comes 4, Experience, which is
ination.
to be secured by promotion from those below as
vacancies occur, and by a tenure which is fixed by
good behavior. With all these there will be some
of the public servants who will turn out badly.
They may become neglectful, insolent, or even
dishonest. Against such occasional changes of
character or conduct, no system of selection can
effectually guard. But the remedy is always at
hand, in the shape of a summary discharge for
cause.
And without cause, and one determined
after impartial investigation, no public servant of
the minor grades, should be removed from office.
he

[Consult, with the usual allowance for the zeal of an
author, Eaton's Civil Service in Great Britain.
The
writer will find his best points in the success in private
enterprise by the employment only of skilled and faithful
agents.]

SKELETON ESSAYS.

217

CIVIL SERVICE REFORM.
AGAINST.

The greater part of the offices to be filled in
the civil service of the United States do not re
Their duties can be learned, as
quire an expert.
a general thing, in a few days —frequently in a
few hours ; and most of them are purely execu
tive, and require no special training. Those that
are not confined to manual labor, can not be
properly filled by those who are illiterate, we
admit ; a tide-waiter, a postal-clerk, a mail-car
rier, and such, should be able to read, write and
cipher; should have sound health, and should be
honest and faithful. In some special departments
they require more knowledge, sometimes of a
special kind. A translator for the State Depart
ment requires a knowledge of the foreign lan
guages, as well as English; and he should be able
to write well and even elegantly. But it is not
needed that he shall be well informed in elec
tricity and hydrodynamics.
The special knowl
edge required is indicated by the duties to be
performed.
For over a hundred years the offices, first under
the old confederation, and then under the Union,
were filled without a preliminary examination.
They were filled by the partisans of the respec
tive parties.
These were rarely, if they were
ever, selected because of their eminent general

218

SKELETON ESSAYS.

ability, or even their special fitness.

The test

was their personal influence, or the personal in
fluence of the friends who recommended them ;
and this influence was gained solely through par
tisan service.
Yet the duties of office have been
generally discharged assiduously and faithfully.
Above all they were discharged civilly, in marked
contrast with those of officials abroad, where a
system of civil service examination is said to pre
vail. No official here dared to have the same
surly demeanor, nor the same dilatory move
ments which prevail abroad, and which Dickens
has so admirably satirised by two phrases — the
" Circumlocution Office ", and " How not to do

it".
The truth is that few of the minor positions in

the civil service — none, except those requiring
They can
experts — require a special training.
be well filled by persons of honesty and aver
age brains, with only the ordinary education
of the country school. That no official should be
appointed who has not a good reputation for hon
esty and industry, or is deficient in the three R's—
reading, 'riting and 'rithmetic, goes without say
ing. But to compel a letter-carrier to submit to an
examination in the higher branches of arithmetic,
or a gauger to one upon geography of the United
States, is simply an act of folly. What has the
one to do with cube root, and the other in the ex
act county and State in which Podunk or Skunk

SKELETON ESSAYS.
ville may be situated

?

219

The letter-carrier requires

good legs and ordinary honesty, and the gauger
a knowledge of the principles of gauging, and
honesty likewise; and that is all there is of it.
Thus far the new system is a ridiculous failure.

It

was meant that incumbents should be ap
pointed without reference to their political opin
ions, and yet the party in power, which ever it is,
manages to get in office its own partisans and
no other. The general public is well satisfied
with the lack of success. When a party is over
thrown for the time, and supplanted by another,
it is an evidence of the popular will. The people
hold the party in possession responsible for the
administration of public affairs. But if its subor
dinates be largely from those who are opposed to
its views, this relieves it of responsibility at once.
Responsibility can only grow out of power that
has all the means and agents at its disposal.
There is still another reason why the old sys
tem, whatever be its defects, is the best. The
feelings of our people, the character of our insti
tutions, and the genius of our system of govern
ment is opposed to the creation of a privileged
class. A bureaucracy is as capable of abuse and
"
"
oppression as any other of the cracys — aristoc
racy, plutocracy, or what not ; the man who holds
his office independently of his superiors, may
perform his official duties within the letter of the
rule, so that ne cause is shown for his displacet

BKELETON ESSAYS.

220

but he shows in his manner a supercilious
ness and lack of civility, begot of security.
The
offensive manner of " Jack-in-office" is wellknown.
Of course, it is not meant to imply that the
members of the civil service shall not be fitted
A
for their duties. Fitness is the first requisite.
fair examination to determine that is proper.
But that found, let each party in power choose
its officials from its own ranks.
Nor is a long tenure in office desirable. Fre
quent changes add to efficiency and vigor. As
to the assertion that you can not readily supply
the place of a trained official, that is the veriest
nonsense.
Death makes removals of the most
experienced, and the fitting successor of the dead
is always found.
"
Dickens's " Our Mutual Friend and it will give
ment

;

[Read

you some apt points in this connection.]

OUR

PUBLIC SCHOOLS SHOULD TEACH MORE.

The object in providing schools for children at
the public expense, is to give the rising genera
tion as much knowledge as may be useful to them
in after life. Another leading object is to train
them in morals and manners, and to accustom
Another object is to indi
them to discipline.
rectly give support to the security of life, person

8KELET0N ESSAYS.
The instruction
and property.
mentary, but it should embrace

231

should be ele
as many depart
ments of knowledge as possible. To confine it
to reading, writing and arithmetic, may be dicta
ted by parsimony, but not by wisdom. To extend
it to the elements of grammar, and to a few leading
facts about geography is not enough. The prin
ciples of natural philosophy, especially that relat
The
ing to dynamic forces, should be taught
laws of health, the more important facts in phy
siology, should form part of the course. Enough
of astronomy should be given to make the youth
familiar with the various stars, the courses of the
planets and the general system of the universe.
Mineralogy is not only a pleasing study, but one
calculated to be useful in after life. Music is a
In short, the
necessity in all mental training.
child should be given as much rudimentary
knowledge as possible.
Much of this may be wasted, it is said. Possi
bly. None can tell the bent of the child's mind,
nor in what department of industry it may find
the best field for activity in after years. But these
very studies will assist to develop the latent
special powers, and thus to determine the child's
It is to the interest of the State that the
future.
capacity of each citizen should be led into the
proper channel, for this increases the productive
energy and general prosperity of the country ;
and wherever there is a decided tendency to any

SKELETON ESSAYS.

222

particular pursuit— not a momentary fancy, but
what proves to be an irresistible leaning —then
provide a more extended
course of instruction in all knowledge connected
with it.
The tendency of the age is to expand the curri
culum of instruction rather than to limit
and
praiseworthy disposition of the popular mind.
The standard of knowledge
far higher than
was
hundred years since, and the amount of
elementary instruction should be raised in ac
We tax ourselves
cordance with that fact.
cheerfully in order that even the poorest may not
grow up in ignorance. Let us have the full ben
Give the children
efit of the money we spend.
all the knowledge the system of teaching can
chance dur
impart, and thus give the humblest
ing their life to rise higher in the social scale, and
develop in the right direction whatever talent
they may naturally possess.
a

a

it

is

is
a

it

should

it,

the school

OUR PUBLIC SCHOOLS SHOULD TEACH LESS.

Tried by

a

is

is

strict standard, our public schools
should merely give instruction in the primary
branches of knowledge, or rather in those
branches by which knowledge may be acquired.
all that
That
required by public need, or by
the dictates of prudent and wise statesmanship.

SKELETON ESSA YS.

223

That instruction, however, should
Anything
avoided.

in

It

be thorough.
which mars its thoroughness should be

An attempt to teach too much ends

only imparting

a smattering

of knowledge.

strikes us that our public school system is ac
quiring a hot-house plan rather than good solid .
old-fashioned culture — that we are trying to force
too much out of the mental soil, and it is about
time that these ambitious efforts to make artists,
scientists, philosophers and statesmen out of
school children, should stop.
There is such a thing as dwarfing the intellect
in attempting to overfeed it, and this is growing to
be a crying evil. It is no uncommon thing to see
a little girl of ten, bright-eyed and pale-faced,
hurrying from school with a load of books, in haste
to cram herself by evening study, for the work of
next day.
" What are your studies, my little dear, besides
"
reading, writing and arithmetic ?
" Geography, grammar, natural philosophy,

history —

"

" Stop, that will do."

The head is crammed full of a number of things,
'piled over one another, and one frequently driv
ing out the other. One step has not been firmly
set on the ladder of knowledge, before the foot is
urged to another. How much of this is retained?
This accumulation of co-existing studies is an
It is better to learn lit
enemy to thoroughness.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

224

a

is

it,

?

is

?

a

?

it,

it

?

it,

tie, well, than to learn much, badly. In the
latter case it is not learned at all. Words are
piled in the mind, without ideas.
Let us give a case in point — a real fact : —
Little Annie came home one day, and her
father asked her —" What are they teaching you
"
at school ?
"Oh, lots of things, papa — geography, and — "
"Geography, eh ? Let me see. If you and I
"
were to take the wagon, and ride somewhere ?
" Yes, papa."
" And we were to come to some water, and
were to ride along its shore for many miles, and
without losing sight of
or crossing
were to
come back to where we had started. Do you un
"
derstand me
" Yes, papa. Go all around
and never lose
and come back to where we began."
sight of
" Precisely. Now what would you call that
"
water
"
"
{Hesitatingly) — A — river
"
" Annie, can you tell me what a lake
"
great body of water en
{Glibly) — A lake
tirely surrounded by land."
Now here the child had received words, no
more. The teacher had intended to be con
scientious, but had too much to do. It was less
her fault than that of the system. There was too
much to do. It was beyond the capacity ">©f
the undeveloped childish mind to take in so many

SKELETON E88AY8.

225

things at one, except in the most superficial
Doubtless, if geography alone had been
way.
added to the three primary branches, it might
have been well taught ; but when the little brain
had to retain at the same time the leading facts
of history, the rules of syntax, the figures of
prosody, the principles of mechanics, of chemis
try, and absurdity only knows what else, some
thing had to escape to make way for some of the
rest of the company, and nothing had a good seat.
Our common schools should attempt less, and
they would be able to perform more.
[Books are less to be depended on for elaborating es
says pro or con on this subject, then on the observation

of the writer.

A

great deal can be said on both sides, and

the best determination of the subject depends upon the
natural capacity and the physical health of pupils. ]

WIT AND HUMOR.

Wit

of subtle comparison

humor, of
Wit is a companion of the
unexpectedness.
But the latter is
refined ; humor of the vulgar.
popular with all classes. He sits easily on the
three legged stool, in the cabin ; and stretches
himself contentedly in an easy chair in the rich
Wit has a select circle of com
man's parlor.
panions ; but humor has everybody for a friend.
We take off our hat to Wit, but we put out our
is a thing

;

y

SKELETON ESSAYS.

226

hand to Humor for a hearty shake. Wit is our
"grand old man"; but Humor "is a jolly good
fellow, which nobody can deny ".
The distinction between wit and humor is best
taught by example : —Thus, when a foreigner in
search of lodgings, was shown the rooms by a
bright, pretty servant girl, he said, banteringly —
" Are you to be let with the apartments, my
"
dear ?

The reply came instantly — "No, sir; lam to
"
be ' let alone.'
The wit of the retort was keen
But when the Western joker
as a razor's edge.
spoke of a man whose feet was so large that he
had to go to the forks of the road in order to pull
off his boots, there was humor. That the feet
were so large that nothing short of the forks of
the road would serve for a boot-jack, was ex
travagantly absurd, but it was unexpected ; and
it is in the combination of extravagant absurdity,
and unexpectedness, in which the fun lay.
Yet that kind of humor is not always appre
ciated.
An Englishman, on hearing the last
"
story, stared in wonder and said — But why
couldn't he draw 'em off in the house ?" His
mind only grasped ,the idea of the locality, and
not the strange use to which it was to be put
There are various varieties of humor, and in
each of these there are more or less masters to
study.

The base and sensual.

Of this you will find in

SKELETON ESSAYS.

227

stances abundantly in Rabelais, Dean Swift and
Lawrence Sterne. It is not at all cleanly, and is
a prostitution and debasement of humor, which
should not soil the mind. It is mingled with wit
in these writers, so much so that it is difficult to
find where the wit ends, and the humor begins,
but it is mixed with more or less uncleanness of
thought and expression. Our fathers indulged in
this variety, but the age has improved over its
predecessors, and sensual humor is banished from
decent society.
Dean Swift gives us
The sarcastic and biting.
most of this, and it can be found in Pope's DunThackeray fur
ciad, and in Byron abundantly.
nishes it abundantly in all his works, and
Douglass Jerrold was one of its masters. It is
of an unpleasant kind, and panders to malignant
feelings.
The playful and kindly. This hurts no one, and
It bubbles up from the
amuses everybody.
humorist like water in a fountain by sunlight,
throwing, up spray, and crowned by rainbows.
Sometime it is combined with the preceding,
but properly enough, since it does not attack
persons, but things ; and is aimed not at individ
uals, but at faults and follies. It is the ally of
virtue and good order, and should be cherished.
Addison, Washington Irving, Sydney Smith, Dr.
Holmes, Lowell, and a host of others, afford
specimens.

SKELETON ESSAYS.

228

Dr.
rollicking and sometimes reckless.
Lever's Irish stories are full of this, and Carleton,
another Irish writer, gives enough for quotations.
The absurd and inconsequential.
This is in
favor just now, and forms what is known in Eng
land as " American humor". It is large, broad
and smacks of the soil, and humorists of that sort
are almost peculiar to this country.
The field is
large, and, contrary to the saying, the laborers
are many. The anecdotes floating through the
journals, embodying this species of fun, if printed
in volumes would stock a good-sized library.
Mark Twain, Josh Billings, and a hundred more,
have made this sort of humor the daily reading
The

of both hemispheres.
Then there are subdivisions of all these. Some
times one of them presents itself at once, and at

[This

may be expanded into

a

a

it

;

it

it,

it,

other times is sly. Sometimes it sparkles on the
surface, and can be picked up at once ; and at
other times it is more or less buried, and has to be
Sometimes it is in
dug out of its surroundings.
the mere turn of an expression, or the happy use
of an unexpected word ; at other times it per
meates a paragraph, a page, or a whole vol
ume. When it comes alone, we enjoy
dismiss
but when combined
and think no more of
with wit,
With
lingers longer in our memory.
dull and cheerless
out it, the world were
place enough.
popular lecture by judic

LECTURES.

229

ious quotations under the various heads from Irving's,
Swift's, Sydney Smith's, Holmes's, Lowell's, Mark Twain's,
Lever's, Hawes's, Jule Hooper's, and Longstreet's
Works, and from the current pen of the day, of which the

Lover's,

journals and magazines furnish ample store.

]

LECTURES.

A

lecture is an expanded essay. But it differs
from the essay in character, as well as length.
The essay is read by some one ; the lecture is
read to many.
The latter therefore requires to
be epigrammatic and declamatory.
It must be
so constructed as to flow trippingly from the
tongue. It is a prepared speech, and its speaker
must seem to be terribly in earnest.
As any of the foregoing skeletons may be ex
panded into elaborate essays, or be made the
basis of such, so any essay may become the basis
of a lecture, either by judicious additions, or by
suggestion. The latter is the best thing to do,
and in order to show the mode, we shall take one
of the foregoing, and expand it into a nearly com
plete lecture. There are two essays on a moot
topic further back in this volume — one in favor
of a prohibitory liquor law, and the other opposed
to it. To construct a lecture upon the affirmative
side, requires no art, and no example is neces

LECTURES.

230

sary.
sider

It

is a popular subject, and when we con
how much mischief intemperance has

To take the
caused, is sustained by sympathy.
converse side is more difficult. Yet we propose to
show how a plausible lecture on that subject may
be constructed ; and how, without seeming to be
an expansion, it shall grow out of the essay. The
difference is, while in the essay the subject is
treated without strict order, in the lecture it is
subjected to methodical arrangement, and pre
pared for effective delivery.

IS "PROHIBITION"

When

a

EFFECTIVE?

law invading personal freedom is pro

posed — when it is to be fundamental, and, as part
of the State Constitution, forbids legislation, and
limits the sovereignty of the people — it should be
closely scrutinised by those jealous of their indi
vidual and municipal rights. We have to consider
the evils at which it is aimed, and whether addi
tional measures are required for their removal ;
determined,
and, those points having been
whether the proposed law will be likely to effect
its purpose. In this consideration we are bound
to look at the nature of the measure itself; the
natural, or even artificial obstacles it is likely to
meet, and to the experience of those States or
peoples that have adopted that or a similar law.

LECTURES.

231

It

is proper also to consider the habits, character
and prejudices of the people for whom the law is

made.
before

The judicious law-giver requires all this

adopt a new law, or even seriously
modify one already in existence ; and, in a free
State, the people, who govern, and whose safety
requires that these conditions be vigorously ful
filled. Laws framed otherwise, lose force and
vitality for lack of popular will. This, so emi
nently true in a free State, is nearly as true under
In one an active, and in the
a rigid despotism.
other, a passive resistance defeats the object of a
distasteful law. The prejudices and habits of a
people will modify, if nothing more, the most
stringent provisions of an offensive statute. The
power of the State thus becomes a thing of con
tempt.
For these reasons I propose to submit this prop
osition — nominally to prohibit the making and
selling of all alcoholic drinks, but really prevent
ing buying by withholding supply—to the test of
common sense, in the light of the character of
mankind, and the recorded experience of States.
The sad effects of drunkenness are not in dis
pute. The streets, the almshouses, the jails and
Their ser
the grave-yards forbid controversy.
mons ring loudly in the ears of the humane.
They are seen among all races and peoples ; they
are found in the hut of the peasant and the palace
of the king. So it was in the earliest history, and
he

LECTURES.

232

so it

will continue during the ages.

After other

methods had been tried for its expulsion, the
pseudo-philanthropists of Maine disinterred from
the dead follies of the past, the plan of enforcing
total abstinence by law ; and, undeterred by its
ghastly failure there, propose to introduce it here,
and to make it a part of the State Constitution,
in order to fetter the hands of the people, where
experience shall have led them to a desire to
abandon the experiment.
Enquiry into this matter embraces two heads : —
First : — Is a law of this kind likely to succeedthrough its own nature, and under attendant cir
cumstances ?

Prohibition is founded upon total abstinence,a
crime against nature, and foreign to the instincts
of man. From the very earliest ages, so far back
as we have any authentic history, we find that
man, savage or civilised, discovered the laws of
fermentation, and applied them to his inherent
Tracing the course of history
love of stimulants.
down, we find the same, and also that man, wher
ever debarred from or denied alcoholic stimu
lants, falls back on the more dangerous narcotics.
The universality of the habit ; its constant pursuit
under advantage or disadvantage ; the fact that
alcohol is generated in the bread we eat ; that
starchy food is converted into glucose by the
ptyalin in the saliva ; that cane-sugar undergoes
the same change in the same way ; that the

LECTURES.

233

glucose is converted into alcohol in the stomach,
and partly into acetic acid in the stomach prepar
atory to decomposition and assimilation by the
system ; all show the desire to be one of the fixed
instincts of man. The lower animals do not
appear to have it, though the cattle relish the
fermented alcoholic food of the Silo, and hence
we find them held up, the hog included, for
human imitation.
The hog does not make rootbeer, currant wine, or any other home-made
drunkmaker ; nor does he go about the streets
singing "we won't go home till morning"; nor
does he cook his victuals, nor wear clothes, nor
get up societies for the regulation of his neigh
bor's food, drink or dress.
It is possible that the
hog may be the happier for that —except at kill
ing time ; but man will not follow his example,
whatever the hog's friends and admirers may
urge. Men who think they are wiser than their
Creator, and believe that had they been consulted
at the beginning, there would have been one less
instinct implanted in man, mourning over this de
fect in our moral constitution, have endeavored
to repress the desire rather than prevent its
abuse.

Attempts have been made by ascetics from
early days to enforce total abstinence from any
indulgence they had no fancy for. But this was
mainly by precept and ostensible example. It
was left for Mahommed and the Maine teetotal

234

LECTURES.

a spasmodic attempt in England, to
sect of the He
regulate men's diet by law.
brews, known as the Nazarites, not only abjured
wine, but would not even eat the grape, refusing
the fruit of the vine from the skin to the seed.
Samson was a Nazarite.
He drank no wine, and
he ate no grapes, though he notably gratified
another instinct ; and it was that amiable failing,
and not drunkenness, which brought about his
ruin.
The Saviour marked his contempt for
those ascetics, not alone by making wine miracu
lously at the wedding-feast at Cana, but by using
the same drink at his Last Supper, and ordering
its drinking perpetually in memory of him and
his last feast with his disciples. The Pharisees
of that time stigmatised him, though he drank
temperately, as a wine-bibber ; the Pharisees of
to-day do the same with meaner beings. Mahommed, to make the greatest gap possible between
his followers and those of Jesus, forbade wine
altogether ; and to-day his disciples, clad in
a thin vesture of mock Christianity, are occu
pying Christian pulpits, and preaching an essen
tial doctrine of the Crescent to the followers of
the Cross. Mahommed did what he did to further
the success of his imposture ; the Mahommedans
of Maine from their meddlesome nature. The
false prophets of Maine gain dupes, but find a bar
to success in the inherent antagonism of human
instinct. When, superadded to the dictum of

ers, with

A

LECTURES.

235

Mahommed, which most of his followers secretly
disobey, or substitute opium or hasheech, you
have a legal command, the failure becomes the
mere signal through another and invincible
cause.

There is

all men, and especially
in freemen, to resist that tyranny which would
place a matter belonging to the church, the
schoolhouse and the family, under the control of
This resistance to tyranny may be at
the State.
a disposition in

;

if

a

it

is

;

;

I

it,

tended by weakened respect for law. If a com
munity become thus demoralised, the fault lies
You turn the masses
in the degrading measure.
into wolves, and complain that they turn and
rend you. Nothing so weakens the dignity of the
State as the multiplication of offenses by law —
the constant conversion of something not malum
in se, into a place among things mala prohibita.
It costs the ignorant or unreflecting no pang of
conscience to disobey such a law. I obey
be
cause have been so educated — and conscience
is a matter of education
but thousands are not
so trained. If they can, they resist
they have
not the power of resistance, they evade. Her. re
it that a prohibitory liquor law generates hy
pocrisy, fraud and deceit, as well as less respect
for law in the abstract. Every man, outside of
the Camanches, feels wrong to steal a horse, and
criminal in
either avoids the theft, or becomes
defiance of his convictions but a man eminent

236

LECTURES.

for his virtues may neglect to sweep the snow off
his side-walk, as the city ordinance directs, and
suffer it to thaw, and then freeze, and so trip up
unwary passengers to the peril of their limbs.
Yet the law is positive in both cases. Much
more marked is this neglect or evasion when
your law attempts to settle, by arbitrary power,
a question of health, morals or diet, appertaining
to the citizen, and thus makes sumptuary legisla
tion. For your law here is aimed at the consum
Incident
ers, through the producer and seller.
ally ,that is another cause of its failure. It violates
the most potent law of trade, and seeks to destroy
the demand by cutting off the supply.
At this point we are apt to be told that the law
is not made because of moderate, but immoder
ate drinking, or, taking an opposite ground, that
drinking is not good for any one, even in modera
tion. To the first I reply, that because some one
else can not control his appetite, I, who can and
do, am not therefore to be denied my right ; and
to the second, that the goodness or badness of
drinking temperately, is a matter of opinion of
which these men are not the supreme judges.
It
is a mere re-appearance in another shape of an
The same thing made the
old plea for tyranny.
Pagans throw the Christians to the lions ; lit up
the fires of Madrid and Smithfield ; caused the
Prelatists to hang the Puritans, the Puritans to
hang the Quakers, and the Quakers to — well, the
X

LECTURES.

237

Quakers generally sustain the Maine liquor law.
Hence arises the insurmountable obstacle to
the success of this law, an obstacle growing from
the nature of our institutions, and the personal
independence which our State and municipal
governments were mainly created to defend.
Our forefathers came here, as others followed for
like purpose, to escape the meddling of law
with matters of morals. They only admitted the
right of the State to regulate manners. It is true
that some of those who settled down East, as
soon as they escaped from tyranny, became
tyrants in turn, and, professing Christianity and
love of human rights, made a code which min
gled the cant of the Pharisee with the decrees of
despotism. The Maine law is a luxuriant shoot
from that same old tree. But the great mass of
the people are not of that breed.
They hold
their personal freedom in jealous regard, and
claim that government is instituted to preserve,
not destroy it. God forbid we should ever be
other than that A people who submit to have
what they may eat, drink or wear prescribed by
self-constituted censors, are only fit for abject
slavery. Sumptuary laws never have succeeded
in any land, and never will. The shore of his
tory is strewn with the wrecks of such measures.
The early monarchs of England made some
efforts in that way, and one of them strove to
They failed.
prevent beer-drinking altogether.

238

LECTURES.

Other attempts were made later on, and the act
of Geo. II, forbade absolutely the retailing of ar
dent spirits. It signally failed, and was wisely re
Stimulants of a more narcotic nature
pealed.
A Turkish sultan
furnish a larger experience.
prohibited the use of tobacco in his dominions
under the severest penalties, extending even to
the life of the offender. Yet the Turks remain
If the people of
the greatest smokers in Europe.
other lands defied or continued these attempts,
what may you expect of the American citizen
when you interfere with his social or domestic
habits ? When indulging in these, should he in
terfere with the rights of others, break the peace,
disturb order, violate decorum, or make himself a
social nuisance, that is a different affair. Then he
He has offended contra
is open to punishment.
bonos mores, and the penalty should be sharp and
severe.
Neither honor, nor manhood, nor per
sonal rights are invaded in such a case, but vin
dicated. But that you and I, who can control
our appetite, and can drink a glass of beer or
wine, or refrain at our will, should be forced to do
not what we please, but what others whose judg
ment we despise may order, is too much.
That
is the crowning reason why a prohibitory liquor
law must inevitably fail.
Now to treat on the other head.
Secondly : — Has the absolute prohibition of the
manufacture and sale of alcoholic liquor succeeded
where most faithfully aud persistently tried?

LECTURES.

239

Maine is the typical place, and the observations
of residents and visitors alike concur in showing
there is no practical difficulty in obtaining liquor
there — beer on tap included. But I do not pro
pose to rely on that testimony alone, but to test
the success or failure of the law by a higher
standard than parole evidence.
The avowed object of the Maine law was to
prohibit the sale of any liquor at all, except in
such few cases as even the most searching law
could not reach ; and, as no one could get drunk
without drinking, to nearly if not quite prevent
As drunkenness is one of the most
drunkenness.
potent causes of poverty, this would sensibly de
crease pauperism, and by enforcing total absti
nence, prevent that deterioration of the race
which they avowed even moderate drinking pro
duced, which would result in a notable decrease
of insanity, idiocy and physical defects.
First, as to liquor-selling. The returns of the
Federal excise show that the number of persons
who take out licenses in Maine as retail liquor
dealers, has doubled within the last few years,
and increases each year. It has been asserted
that some of these licenses are taken out by the
State and county liquor agents. But that is an
Those liquor agents do not take out a li
error.
cense at all, and are not required to by the reve
nue laws. Neal Dow has said that the bulk of
these licenses are taken out by druggists in the

LECTURES.

240

That is not
regular conduct of their business.
true.
All persons requiring liquor or^alcohol for
medical or mechanical ^purposes must go to the
official agent — the law is imperative.
The drug
gist has not to take out a license to use alcohol,
nor to sell a tincture when prescribed. But the
druggist has no right under the State law to sell
liquor, and if the druggists be part of the small
army which pays the United States for license in
Maine, they are illicit dram-sellers, neither more
nor less.

I

X

wish to call your attention to another fact in
this connection.
In looking over a file of the
Commissioner's Reports, you will find the in
crease of the number of retail liquor-dealers'
licenses in the States of Maine, New Hampshire
and Vermont from 1 880 to 1889, to be over 10
per cent., when, if the laws were effective, there
should be no license taken out at all. In the
States of New York and New Jersey, during the
same period, the increase has been respectively
In the three prohibition
25 and 16 per cent.
States the increase has been about that of popu
lation, which grows there slowly ; in the other
States, much less — in New Jersey about one-half.
And another remarkable fact is that these three
States have in proportion to their voting popula
tion, more licenses required per hundred than in
a number of the other States of the Union where
the sale is not prohibited by law.

LECTURES.

241

I do not propose
Secondly : as to drunkenness.
to encumber any argument with dry tables of
figures, and shall deal with the matter generally.
The arrests for drunkenness, and for offences
traceable to that cause, give a fiar notion of its
extent. The drunkard in New York or Maine is
treated much the same. Let him tipple at home,
and go to bed drunk, or keep quiet as he mean
ders home on the sidewalk, and he is not much
troubled. But let him take up his lodgings in the
street, or get into a fight, or make night hideous
with his howling, and a blue-coated guardian of
the peace affords him an interview with a sitting
magistrate. In looking over the records a strong
contrast will be observed. In New York City
the larger portion appear to drink. The place is
always half full of strangers, and, adding to these,
those who sleep in the adjoining cities, but do
business in New York for six days out of the
seven, the floating population of New York is over
a half million. There come luckless adventurers
who drink to drown their disappointment ;
strangers, who drink to kill time ; traders, who
seem to think a cocktail an essential part of a
bargain ; while whiskey-shops, wine-shops and
beer-shops are in almost every block, and to be
met with at every turn. And yet the percentage
of arrests in proportion to the resident population
in 1880, which I take as the census year — not
counting the regular residents, is 2.44 per cen

242

LECTURES.

that of Portland, Maine, in the
same year, which was 3.56 per centum — the last
ahead of that of Philadelphia and San Francisco,
two cities where toping has long been one of the
When you come to compare
industrial arts.
smaller cities in the two States or in New Jersey
with Maine, or in either of the middle States with
Vermont or New Hampshire, the contrast is
equally striking. There is the town of Augusta,
Maine, with 8,665 population, which has over 2 per
cent, of arrests for drunkenness, a much greater
amount than of any town of the same size, or of one
twice, or five times as large, in New York, or New
Jersey. There are the official tables. Judge for
yourselves. And of the 420 police arrests that
year — nearly one-twentieth of the population,
clergymen, old maids and babies, you find that
There were
342 may be set down to whiskey.
175 for drunkenness- with disturbance (whiskey) ;
53 for assault and battery (whiskey) ; 1, assault
and battery, with intent to kill (whiskey, or a
woman) ; 3, disturbance on the street (whiskey) ;
Ob
and 26, liquor selling (whiskey, of course).
turn, far behind

serve that the arrests for drunkenness

are

all

coupled with disturbance. The quiet drunkards
in Maine booze in peace. The boiled owl appears
to be the State bird, and they don't disturb him.

I

know that Augusta is the seat of the legislature,

and there is more or less drunkenness in all leg
islative towns. Whether this is because of the

LECTURES.

243

floating population, or because the natives, dis
gusted at the sobriety of the members, drink
more to exhibit their feeling, or whether whiskey
is a potent factor in legislation where it figures

stationery, I do not pretend to determine.
But you will note another fact as you go over the
statistics. During four of the years between 1870
and 1880, they made special raids through the
State to enforce prohibition. During that time
the arrests were heavier, and in one year they
were 4.38 per cent, in Bangor, and over 5 per
cent, in Portland. Five per cent. ! About onefourth of the number of the adult males ! What
a Paradise of sobriety is made by a prohibitory
as

law

!

Thirdly ; as to pauperism. Look over the
records of the various towns in Maine, and note
the poor-expenses, and the cost per capita of the
population. You will notice that the cost to each
inhabitant, man, woman and child, runs from 43
cents, to an inconsiderable fraction less than one
dollar — during the great liquor raid it ran up, in
one place, to a dollar and a half; and then ob
serve that nowhere in New York or New Jersey
have they reached the minimum of that cost.
The extreme rate in Bangor for one year was ex
ceptional ; but take that in Bath, during 1880,
and if inflicted in certain middle State towns
and cities at the time it would have aston
ished the rate payers. It would have levied for

244

LECTURES.

the maintenance of the poor in New York State,
in Buffalo, $154,979; in Albany, $90,668 ; Roch
ester, $89,277 ; and even the little city of Binghamton, $17,300. In New Jersey, Newark, instead
of less than $46,500 would have had to place
$136,372 in her tax levy for this item ; Hoboken, instead of less than $5,000, would have had
And
$39,960 ; and so on, all through the State.
the paupers in Maine are fed and housed at the
cheapest rate. To treat them as such are treated
in New York or New Jersey would materially in
crease the figures. Outside of the case of Bath,
which is extreme, the poor-tax in Maine runs
from 30 to 100 per cent, over towns of like mag
nitude in the Middle States.
This paves the way for notice of the fact that
there is a greater proportionate number of paupers
in the three down-east prohibition States, than in
any other State in the union. We would naturally
expect New York to have the most, and the State
which is her sea-board neighbor, the next.
New
York has large cities, and to her metropolis comes
the largest amount of foreigners. Those who
have means — the Germans and Swedes especially
— go West, and take up public land. The poorer
immigrant can get no farther than the port at
which he lands. There are many who do not
find this country to be El Dorado.
Their little
stock of money is soon exhausted ; the supply of
^ laborers is more than the demand for labor ; or

LECTURES.

245

it

it,

sickness comes.
Thousands of honest and in
dustrious people thus become public charges.
That much for New York, and its adjacent
cities. The conditions are different in Maine.
That is not a State foreigners go to. It should
have half the poverty of New York ; it does have
twice as much. The record of the census year
shows it.
Maine's pauperism is exceeded by
that of no State in the Union, save New Hamp
shire, and New Hampshire is a prohibition State,
with a law more stringent than that of Maine.
The paupers in New York State for 1880, were
12,407, or one in 409; in New Jersey, 2,981, or
one in 379 ; while those of Maine were 3,211, or
one in 202, and those in New Hampshire, 2,037,
or one in 120. The average number of paupers
in the whole United States was one in 545.
Now all pauperism does not proceed from
drunkenness, nor, if we were all totally abstinent,
should we all be rich. There are other causes
for poverty than drink, and drink is frequently
a consequence rather than a cause.
The prohib
itionists are always insisting on the pauperism re
sulting directly from excessive drinking, and in
directly from moderate drinking. I am merely
taking deductions from the premises they furnish.
But one thing must be admitted, namely : that
drunkenness, even when coming from poverty
intensifies
and assists materially in reducing
to the lower level of pauperism. It generate*

246

LECTURES.

wastefulness, lack of energy and unthrift ; where
you find it in such enormous amount as in Maine
and New Hampshire, the irresistible conclusion
comes that many of the people there drink to
excess ; and, if they drink to excess, under the
prohibition of the making and selling of intoxi
cating liquors, your prohibitory law is of no prac
tical value. It is either not enforced at all, or
its spasmodic and irregular enforcement increases
the evils at which it is aimed.

Fourthly: — As to physical degeneracy, and the

It is claimed
deterioration of the human race.
that drunkenness enervates the productive powers
of the human race, and vitiates the stock. That
is in a measure true. It is also claimed that onehalf of the cases — some reckless teetotalers say
all — of insanity and idiocy are due to the same
As to insanity that is not true. A search
cause.
of the records of the lunatic asylums shows,
wherever they make a close investigation into
the causes of insanity, alcoholism bears the pro
portion of from eight to twelve per cent., slightly
less than in Europe. With idiocy it is different.
Where parents narcotise themselves habitually
with opium, alcohol, or any other stimulant
pushed to narcotism, the chances for idiocy in
Applying these
the offspring are increased.
facts, however, in the sweeping way the mock
philanthrophists put them ; assuming their posi
tion to be true in its length, breadth and height,

LECTURES.

247

Let us examine the re
turns for these, and for physical defects of the
where does it lead

us

?

race, in the two Middle States quoted, and in the
three prohibitory New England States.
In New

York, you have

20,139 lunatics and idiots in a
5,082,871, which is one in 252.
In

population of
New Jersey, you have

which is one in 326 ;
Now turn to the other States. In Maine, you have
2,867, or one in 226 ; in New Hampshire, 1,759, <>r
one in 197 ; and in Vermont, 1,819, or one hi 183.
Here is the gauge by which our prohibition friends
determine the amount of drunkenness, and it regis
ters sadly for the prohibitory States. But, if you
3,461,

confine your investigation to the native population,
the results are still comparatively worse, though
positively better all around. Forthen we find of the
native lunatics and idiots, New York has 1 3,308, or
one in 298; New Jersey, 2,422, or one in 375, Maine
2,647, or one in 222 ; New Hampshire, 1,605, or
one in 187; and Vermont, 1,581, or one in 121.
As toother physical defects said to arise from
the same cause, though how or why I am un
able to see, they are at similar ratio. In New
York, there are 8,775 deaf mutes and blind, or
one in 579, and 6,476 of them, or one in 598,
natives. In New Jersey, there are 1,356, or one
in 834, with 1,069, or one 'n 851, natives.
In
Maine, there are 1,203, or one >n 5°9. a»d 1,131,
or one in 851, natives. In New Hampshire, there
are 633, or one in 548, with 584, or one in 514,

LECTUHKS.

248

In Vermont, there are 698, or one in
with 573, or one in 508, natives. Certainly

natives.
490,

prohibitory laws have not improved the stock.
The deterioration of the human race is shown
by a decrease in the growth of population. And
here we have a striking instance of the terrible
effects of drunkenness, as produced by the pro
hibitory law of Maine. When Maine was a dis
trict, in 1800, it had a population of 131,779,
while New Jersey had in the same year, a popu
lation of 183,558, New York, 589,051.
But the
unrivalled water-power, the numerous harbors,
and the mineral and forest resources of Maine
had marked her for the seat of a prosperous com
monwealth.
In a half century, her progress
was remarkable.
In 1850, New York had in
creased to 3,006,394 souls, a gain of 427 per cent.
To her borders there set a constant tide of migra
tion, and a heavy percentage of that remained
with her. New Jersey, living between two great
States, and supposed to derive advantages from
both, only reached 489,555, a gain of less than
Maine rose meanwhile to 583,159,
167 per cent.
or over 344 per cent., mainly without exterior
gain. But while New York and New Jersey, the
one in 1847, and the other in 1849, had adopted
quasi-prohibitionary laws, they both abandoned
them at or before 1850. In the following year
Maine adopted prohibition, and has kept it.
Now mark the difference of progress from 1850

LECTURES.

249

to 1880. In the latter year, New York had
grown during the thirty years to 5,082,871, an
increase of 64 per cent; New Jersey, to 1,131,116, or over 131 per cent."; while Maine, in the
same period, only reached 648,936, which is less
than

12

per cent.

This falling off has been asserted to be due to
the enterprise of the Maine young men, who go
elsewhere in large numbers, to seek their for
tunes. If that were true, there should be a great
But that is
surplus female population in Maine.
conspicuously not the fact. The record shows of
the native population of the three States, that
New York has a surplus of females of 46,138, or
2.44 per cent. ; New Jersey, 13,564, or 3.02 per
cent. ; and Maine only 1,033, or 0-3S Per cent
True, there is a migration from Maine, nearly as
much from New York, and both are ahead of
New Jersey. But the surplus of females shows
it is from New York and New Jersey, the enter
prising young men go. From Maine, the exodus
seems to be in couples.
Let this be explained by any ingenious fallacy,
while I proceed to another, and crucial test. In
1880. there were in New York, 1,101,443 children
under ten years of age, which is 21.65 per cent,
and yet the tenement system in New York city
kills off children like a pestilence.
In Maine,
there were 129,267, or 19.91 per cent. ; in Ver
mont, 68,234, or 20-53 Per cent. ; and in New

250

LECTURES.

Hampsnire, 60,803, or I7-52 Per cent. But per
haps it may be said that it is the greater amount
of foreigners in New York that does this — it be
ing erroneously assumed that foreigners are more
fecund than natives. Let this notion be dispersed
by the facts. Of those born to the natives in
New York, there were 1,079,404, or 27.87 per
cent. ; New Jersey, 260,549, or 28.63 per cent.
Maine had 125,353, or 21.23 per cent. ; Vermont,
66.181, or 22.71 per cent, and New Hampshire,
or 1906 per cent.
But I have not done
57>352>
with this test. Take the children of one year old,
and you will find them to be for New Jersey,
2.64 and New York, 2.53 per cent. ; while Ver
mont, Maine and New Hampshire stand respect
ively, 2.03, 2.14 and 1.82. With the infants born
during the year, the contrast is equally striking.
Here they run as 3.07 and 2.93 in the two middle
States, and in three prohibitory States, 2.29, 2.16
The virility of the race in the latter
and 2.
States is fast sinking under opium, illicit whiskey

\.

and tonic bitters, their consumption aided and
encouraged by a prohibitory law which only
prohibits good manners, good morals, and the
progress of the human race.
I have thus shown from indisputable records
something of the disastrous effects of the socalled prohibition in the States where it has nom
So far as
inally prevailed for over a generation.
Maine is concerned, the apostles of the doctrine

LECTURES.

251

come forward to sustain me. At a meeting of
the State Temperance Society, held at Augusta,
the deliverance was decided. Joshua H. Nye, a
life-long prohibitionist, formerly State Constable
for the enforcement of the law and a leading cit
izen of Maine, said the statement of ex-Governor
Dingley, that there was no liquor-selling in
any towns of Maine, is " a fraud, a delusion and a
humbug," and added that liquor-selling is "ter
ribly on the increase all over the State, and every
woman and child in the State knows it." He

further said — " Drug stores are only gilded rumhells under another name." As you have heard,
the records testify to the truth of Mr. Nye's asser
tions. Recent prohibition candidate for Govern
or, Colonel Eustiss, was equally decided in
declaring that the law was not enforced, and
boldly charged the party in power, as " in full
league and sympathy with the rum-power in the
State ".
The Rev. Mr. M'Intyre said that the
records would show county attorneys, and mu
nicipal judges to be " guilty of complicity of crime
with rum-sellers ". " It is quite customary," said
he, " for those officials to settle with offenders
for $i00, when under the law they should have
been sent to jail ; and sometimes cases are bought
off for five or ten dollars." The Rev. Mr. Haskill said — " for the past ten years rum-selling has
been on the increase in Maine ". And speaking of
his own town, Damariscotta, he stated there were

262

LECTURES.

twenty-five young men there addicted to drink
ing where there was one, seventeen years ago.
There is the picture, painted by artists " to the
manner born", and its faithfulness none can truth
fully gainsay.
Nor does the experience of other States which
have tried the same measure fail to confirm the
experience of Maine, Vermont and New Hamp
shire. Michigan, in the West, and Massachusetts
and Rhode Island, in the East, tried it long
enough to show* that it worked injury, and re
pealed it when it had produced a certain amount
of degradation and demoralisation.
Iowa and
Kansas are making a ludicrous trial of the exper
iment, and the results would be farcical were they
The former of these States
not mischievous.
does not prohibit the making of whiskey for ex
port, and has within her borders, in active oper
ation, one of the largest distilleries in the world.
The convenient way for the advocates of prohi
bition seems to be, not to meet and explain
opposing facts, but to abuse those who present
Let any one
them for careful consideration.
deny the propriety, or rather the power of a pro
hibitory law, no matter how the record and
argument sustain him, and he is at once held up
as an advocate of intemperance, and a hireling
of the rum power. Such is a very convenient way
with which to supplement deficient facts and false
reasoning. But that is idle waste of words.
A

LECTURES.

253

j

great question cannot be so determined.

Any

effective measure for the suppression or lessening
the evils of intemperance, should receive support
by the good and humane.
But when a project,
after a long trial, has been found to fail, and
worse than fail, by aggravating the evils it was
meant to remove, it should be replaced by some
thing that is better calculated to attain the desired end.